Title: 92959067

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 74

Markdown Content:
Tumor context determines ARID1A effects on gastric cancer immunity 

Shu Xiao, 1,12 Ryan T. Heslin, 1,12 Morgan F. Pettigrew, 1,12 John D. Karalis, 1,12 Nafeesah Fatimah, 1Shao-Po Huang, 2 Verena Cao, 1 Esther Burns, 1 Lynn Y. Kwon, 1 Ibrahim Nassour, 3 Skylar L. Nahi, 1 Hsien Tsung Lai, 1 Changjin Hong, 4 Tae Hyun Hwang, 4 Isaac S. Chan, 2,5,6,7 Suntrea T.G. Hammer, 5, 8 Hao Zhu, 2,5,9,10,11 Sam C. Wang 1, 5, 8,13 1. Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 2. Department of Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 3. Department of Surgery, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32608 4. Center for Computational Systems Biology and Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232 5. Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA 75390 6. Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA 75390 7. Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA. 8. Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 9. Children’s Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 10. Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 11. Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390 12. These authors contributed equally 13. Lead contact 

Corresponding Author: Sam C. Wang, MD, Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390, Telephone: (214) 645-4673 , Email: sam.wang@utsouthwestern.edu The authors declare no relevant conflicts of interest. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ABSTRACT 

The role of ARID1A in cancer immune evasion remains uncertain, with prior studies reaching opposing conclusions. In addition, previous work has shown that the role of ARID1A in cell-autonomous tumorigenesis is context-dependent. Using isogenic murine gastric cancer models, we found that in vivo Arid1a loss in an autochthonous genetically engineered mouse model of gastric cancer conferred T cell-dependent immune evasion, while in vitro deletion did not. Mechanistically, tumor Arid1a loss reprogrammed the tumor microenvironment into an immune desert through suppression of GM-CSF secretion and interferon-γ responsiveness. These changes were not observed when Arid1a was deleted in vitro . In human gastric cancer, an immune-cold phenotype was restricted to ARID1A mutants in the genomically stable subtype, while ARID1A loss in the chromosomal instability subtype was associated with variable immune profiles. These results demonstrate that tumor ARID1A loss does not intrinsically confer pro- or anti-tumor immune properties and instead is determined by tissue context. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

BACKGROUND 

ARID1A is a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex and is one of the most commonly mutated genes in cancer. 1 ARID1A is generally considered a tumor suppressor; however, we have previously shown that ARID1A is permissive for cancer formation in normal liver tissue, demonstrating that ARID1A has context-specific effects. 2Whether ARID1A induces pro- or anti-tumor immunity is uncertain due to conflicting reports. Some groups have shown that cancers with loss-of-function ARID1A mutations become more immunogenic and responsive to immunotherapies. 3-5 However, others report that ARID1A loss leads to pro-tumorigenic immune effects. 6-8 Similarly, there have been conflicting reports of how tumor ARID1A mutations correlate to immunotherapy response in the clinic. 9-11 Delineating the immune effects of ARID1A mutations is clinically necessary as ARID1A mutation status is being tested as a stratification biomarker for immunotherapy use (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04957615, NCT06518564, NCT04953104, NCT04065269 ). Additionally, the introduction of SWI/SNF-targeted inhibitors in early-phase clinical trials further emphasizes the need for a deeper understanding of the mechanisms that link tumor ARID1A status to tumor immunity. 12 Tumor cell immunogenicity is shaped, in part, by host contexts that exert selection pressures that “sculpt” cancer cells. In this process, known as immunoediting, tumor clones that elude immune clearance persist until they acquire the capability to completely escape immune control, at which point the cancer progresses. 13,14 In this study, we compared gastric cancers in which tumor ARID1A loss occurred under different contexts. We established gastric cancer organoids in which Arid1a was deleted in vitro and compared them to an autochthonous genetically engineered mouse model in which Arid1a was deleted in vivo . We found that Arid1a loss promoted immune evasion only in the in vivo deletion model, through altered GM-CSF and IFNGR1 expression that blunted the initiation of the cancer immunity cycle. These alterations .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint were absent when Arid1a was deleted in vitro . We next confirmed the context-dependency of 

ARID1A function in human patients. We analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas gastric adenocarcinoma cohort and found that the association of ARID1A mutation to immunogenicity differed based on molecular subtype. Together, our findings indicate that the immune effect of tumor ARID1A loss is context-dependent and suggest that divergent results from previous studies on cancer immune effects of ARID1A may be due to the different molecular and host contexts that each study utilized. 

RESULTS 

In vitro Arid1a deletion in gastric cancer tumoroids promoted tumor growth but not immune evasion 

TP53 and CDH1 are commonly altered tumor suppressor genes in gastric cancer. 15 We generated gastric cancer organoids (tumoroids) from mice with the genetic backgrounds of 

Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP and either Arid1a +/+ or Arid1a flox/flox (Figure 1A ). 16 Once the tumoroids were established, adenovirus carrying Cre recombinase was added to produce in vitro recombination ( in-vitro -R) of the floxed alleles to result in Trp53 and Cdh1 

deletion, eYFP expression, and Arid1a deletion in Arid1a flox/flox tumoroids ( Figure 1B) . We refer to the tumoroid lines as in-vitro -R Arid1a wild-type (WT) and in-vitro -R Arid1a knockout (KO). The tumoroids were placed under nutlin-3a selection to enrich for Trp53 -null cells. 17 We confirmed the expected deletion of Trp53 and Cdh1 (Figure 1C; Supplemental Figure 1 ) and confirmed all tumoroids expressed eYFP ( Figure 1D ). We first compared the growth kinetics of the tumoroids and found in-vitro -R Arid1a KO lines grew faster than the in-vitro -R Arid1a WT lines, consistent with a tumor suppressive function for 

Arid1a (P < 0.0001; Figure 1E ). To confirm this finding in an in vivo setting, we injected the tumoroids into the flanks of NOD.Cg-Prkdc scid Il2rg tm1Wjl /SzJ (NSG) mice and found that both in-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids engrafted robustly, which we defined as tumors reaching at least 200 mm 3 followed by continuous growth ( Figure 1F ). The engrafted tumors appeared histologically similar to gastric adenocarcinoma, had the expected ARID1A expression based on the genotype, and expressed YFP ( Figure 1G ). Consistent with the in vitro growth assay, the engrafted in-vitro-R Arid1a KO tumors grew faster than the Arid1a WT tumors (P < 0.001; 

Figure 1H ). To determine whether tumor Arid1a status affected their interaction with the host immune system, we injected in-vitro -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into syngeneic littermate controls of the mice from which we generated the tumoroids. We found neither tumoroid genotype was able to engraft effectively and produce a growing tumor in these immunocompetent hosts ( Figure 1I ). Instead, for both genotypes, the tumor either completely regressed or remained very small and stable in size. On H&E, the masses that were present 4 months post-injection consisted of only mature collagenized scar without evidence of residual carcinoma. Some scarred areas were surrounded by mononuclear inflammatory cells ( Figure 1J ). These data suggested that while Arid1a loss promoted growth in an immunodeficient setting, Arid1a loss did not support immune evasion. Both genotypes were effectively cleared by the immune system, which may be due to the antigenicity that the eYFP produced. 18 

In vivo tumor Arid1a loss in genetically engineered mice promoted aggressive features and shortened survival 

We next tested the role of Arid1a on gastric cancer biology in an autochthonous transgenic mouse model of gastric cancer. 19 We generated Atp4b-Cre; Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP mice that were Arid1a +/+ (WT), Arid1a +/flox (Het), or Arid1a flox/flox (KO; Figure 2A ). 

Atp4b is expressed only in gastric parietal lineage cells, which differentiate into the acid-.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint producing cells in the stomach. 19,20 These mice were isogenic to the mice from which in-vitro-R

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids were derived. We refer to this system that had in vivo 

recombination of floxed alleles as in-vivo -R. 

In-vivo-R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice all appeared grossly normal and were fertile. However, when we performed histologic examinations of their stomach mucosa, there was evidence of dysplasia in the Arid1a Het and Arid1a KO mice by day 5 of life ( Figure 2B ). By 6 weeks of age, some mice had intramucosal carcinoma in all three genotypes, and by 24 weeks, invasive cancer was present ( Figure 2B ). Although there was a trend toward accelerated cancer formation in Arid1a Het and Arid1a KO mice at various ages, this difference was not statistically significant as compared to the Arid1a WT cohort, likely due to small sample size. To perform a statistically rigorous comparison, we generated a large cohort of in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT, Het, and KO mice for long-term aging. As these mice aged, we observed that gastric cancer formed in all three genotypes with 100% penetrance; however, the mice demonstrated progressively shorter survival with the loss of each Arid1a allele. The median overall survival for 

in-vivo -R Arid1a WT mice was 42.6 weeks (N = 81), while the median survival of Arid1a Het mice was 39.4 weeks (N = 89, hazard ratio (HR), 1.9, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.3–2.8), and of Arid1a KO mice was 38 weeks (N = 80, HR, 2.3, 95% CI, 1.5–3.5; P < 0.001; Figure 2C ). The data presented are pooled from two cohorts of experimental mice generated at two separate time points and showed similar survival differences across the genotypes. The tumors that formed were a mix of intestinal and diffuse histology, and the proportion of each type did not differ across the genotypes ( Figure 2D ). Using immunohistochemistry, we confirmed ARID1A protein expression was completely lost in the gastric cancers present in in-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

vivo-R Arid1a KO mice and retained in the majority of Arid1a WT and Het malignant cells. All tumors expressed YFP as expected ( Figure 2D ). Consistent with previous work showing that tumor Arid1a loss promoted invasive capacity and metastasis, 21 we found that the cancers that developed in the transgenic mice had increased invasiveness with Arid1a loss. At the time of death, only 11% of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT mice had extragastric extension of the tumor, which is analogous to stage T4 disease in human patients where the primary tumor erodes through the outermost serosal layer of the stomach wall, while 25% of Arid1a Het and 56% of Arid1a KO mice showed extragastric extension (P < 0.01; Figure 2E ). Further supporting the concept that Arid1a loss promoted tumor invasiveness, 16% of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT had gross metastases at necropsy, as compared to 30% of Arid1a Het, and 60% of Arid1a KO mice (P < 0.01; Figure 2F–G ). Metastases were seen in lymph nodes, peritoneum, liver, and lungs, which is a pattern of spread consistent with human disease. To facilitate mechanistic work, we generated primary cell lines from in-vivo-R primary tumors. While we had a 50% success rate deriving cell lines from Arid1a Het and KO tumors, we could not generate any Arid1a WT cell lines, suggesting a strong selection pressure against Arid1a 

consistent with tumor suppressor effects ( Figure 2H–K; Supplemental Figure 2A ). We next tried overexpressing ARID1A in the in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells. Of the 24 clones we generated, only 2 expressed ARID1A on Western blotting, again suggesting strong selection pressure against the presence of Arid1a (Figure 2L–M; Supplemental Figure 2B ). In contrast, we were successful in our attempts to generate three-dimensional tumoroids from both in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumors suggesting that the three dimensionality of the organoid system is more supportive of in vitro growth of Arid1a WT gastric cancer cells ( Figure 2N–P ). When we injected in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into the flanks of NSG mice, .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint both genotypes formed tumors that had histologic features of gastric adenocarcinoma, had the expected ARID1A expression profile, and expressed YFP ( Figure 2Q; Supplemental Figure 2C ). 

To confirm that these in-vivo-R tumoroids and cell lines maintained the relevant biological features seen in the transgenic mice, such as metastatic capability, we performed tail vein injections of tumoroids into NSG mice. We found that 13% of mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT tumoroids and 100% of mice injected with Arid1a KO tumoroids developed gross lung metastases (P < 0.0001; Figure 2R; Supplemental Figure 2D ). Similarly, when we injected in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cell lines overexpressing ARID1A or GFP into the flanks of NSG mice, we found that only 13% of mice that were engrafted with Arid1a KO cells that overexpressed 

ARID1A developed metastases, as compared to 88% of mice engrafted with Arid1a KO cells expressing GFP (P < 0.05; Figure 2S ). Finally, we saw a similar, but statistically insignificant, trend with in-vivo-R Arid1a Het and KO cell lines, which developed metastases at a rate of 40% and 76%, respectively (P = 0.07; Figure 2T ), suggesting a dose-dependent effect of Arid1a as a metastasis suppressor. In sum, these data in the in-vivo-R context further confirmed that Arid1a 

acts as a tumor suppressor in gastric cancer, consistent with observations made in the in-vitro-R

Arid1a tumoroids ( Figure 1E and 1H ). In contrast to in-vitro -R tumoroids, when we compared the growth of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroid lines in vitro via live imaging we did not observe a clear trend ( Figure 2U ). We then measured the Ki-67 positivity rates of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids injected into the flanks of NSG mice and did not observe a difference ( Figure 2V ), as was the case when we measured Ki-67 rates in the primary tumors of in-vivo-R mice ( Figure 2W ). Previous published work similarly led to contradictory conclusions regarding the effect of tumor Arid1a loss on proliferative capacity. 5,7,22 These conflicting results, along with our findings, suggest that there .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint are context-dependent factors driving the cell-autonomous tumor proliferative capacity in response to Arid1a loss. 

In vivo tumor Arid1a loss conferred immune evasive capability 

To identify the molecular programs that underpin the aggressive phenotypes seen with Arid1a 

loss in mice, we performed bulk RNA-sequencing of the primary tumors collected from mice at the time of death. We performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 23 and found that the most enriched programs in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT mouse tumors relative to in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumors were immune-related ( Figure 3A ), suggesting an interaction between tumor Arid1a 

status and the host immune system that determined cancer behavior. Notably, we found that the HALLMARK_INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE pathway was the most enriched gene set in the murine in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumors ( Figure 3A–B ). As IFN-γ is a key promoter of immune clearance of cancer through cytotoxic T cell activity, 24,25 we performed qPCR to measure genes related to cytotoxic T cell activity. Cxcl9 , Cxcl10 , Gzma , and Nkg7 were each expressed at higher levels in Arid1a WT tumors than KO tumors ( Figure 3C ). We next tested the capacity of in-vivo -R tumoroids for immune evasion based on Arid1a status. First, we injected in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into the flanks of NSG mice and found that both genotypes engrafted at nearly a 100% rate ( Figure 3D ). In contrast, when we injected the tumoroids into the flanks of immunocompetent, syngeneic hosts, only 32% of in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT tumoroids engrafted while 73% of in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids formed tumors (P < 0.01; Figure 3E ). We confirmed these findings using the cell line systems, which were also generated from the primary tumors of transgenic mice. We found that 94% of NSG mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells overexpressing GFP or ARID1A formed tumors ( Supplemental Figure 3A ). In contrast, only 38% of immunocompetent mice injected with ARID1A -overexpressing in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells formed tumors versus 75% of immunocompetent mice .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint injected with control GFP -overexpressing cells (P < 0.05; Supplemental Figure 3B ). Similarly, we found that 100% of NSG mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a Het and 97% of NSG mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cell lines formed tumors ( Supplemental Figure 3C ). In contrast, when injected into immunocompetent hosts, only 27% of mice with in-vivo -R Arid1a 

Het cells and 96% of mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells engrafted (P < 0.0001; 

Supplemental Figure 3D ). Next, we tested if the immune system also affected Arid1a -mediated metastasis. We previously found that in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids that were injected into the tail veins of NSG mice had significantly fewer lung metastases as compared to mice injected with in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids ( Figure 2R ). When we performed tail vein injections of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into immunocompetent recipients, we found no lung metastases in either genotype suggesting that the autochthonous derived tumoroids could not colonize the lungs in the setting of an intact immune system (data not shown). Thus, we utilized a different metastasis model in which tumor cells were introduced via intracardiac injections. First, we injected in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO cells overexpressing GFP or ARID1A into NSG mice. At the time of sacrifice, 38% of mice bearing ARID1A overexpressing cells had metastasis, as compared to 79% of mice injected with 

GFP -expressing cells (P = 0.05; Supplemental Figure 3E ), consistent with our earlier finding that ARID1A is a metastasis suppressor in the tail vein injection system ( Figure 2R ). However, when we used immunocompetent hosts as recipients, none of the mice bearing ARID1A 

overexpressing cells had metastasis, while 75% of mice injected with GFP -expressing cells formed metastases (P < 0.001; Supplemental Figure 3E ). Notably, while a similar proportion of NSG and immunocompetent hosts developed metastases when injected with GFP -expressing cells, a significantly lower proportion of immunocompetent mice injected with ARID1A -expressing cells developed metastases, as compared to NSG hosts (38% vs 0%; P < 0.05; 

Supplemental Figure 3E ). We confirmed this finding using in-vivo-R Arid1a Het and KO cell .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint lines. While 75% of both NSG and immunocompetent mice developed metastases after injection with in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells, the proportion of metastasis development significantly decreased with the injection of in-vivo-R Het cells from 57% in NSG mice to 6% in immunocompetent mice (P < 0.05; Supplemental Figure 3F ). In sum, these data demonstrate that tumor cells in which 

Arid1a was lost in the presence of immune selection pressure (as accomplished by in vivo 

recombination of floxed Arid1a alleles), evaded immune clearance more effectively than Arid1a 

WT cells. 

Arid1a-mediated immune evasion required T cells 

Since T cells are key effectors of the cancer immunity cycle, we next asked if T cells were necessary for Arid1a -mediated immune surveillance. We injected tumoroids and cell lines into athymic nude mice, which lack mature T cells. We found that in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroid injections had 93% and 94% engraftment rates, respectively ( Figure 3F ), while in-vivo-

R Arid1a KO cells overexpressing GFP and ARID1A engrafted at a rate of 100% and 83%, respectively ( Supplemental Figure 3G ), and in-vivo -R Arid1a Het and KO cell lines engrafted at a rate of 94% and 100%, respectively ( Supplemental Figure 3H ; P = non-significant in all 3 experiments). To further confirm the essential role of T cells in Arid1a -mediated immune clearance, we injected 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into immunocompetent hosts that were treated with anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies ( Supplemental Figure 3I ). We found that while mice injected with anti-CD8 antibody showed modestly increased in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroid growth and engraftment (P = NS), concomitant depletion of CD4 and CD8 cells markedly increased tumor growth (P < 0.0001; Figure 3G ) and engraftment (P < 0.05; Figure 3H ). Of note, we found that while anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 treatment did increase in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroid engraftment and tumor growth, it was to a lesser degree since in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids already .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint robustly engrafted and grew in immunocompetent hosts ( Supplemental Figure 3J–3K ). In sum, these data showed that T cells were necessary for immune clearance of tumor cells that retained Arid1a expression. Overall, the disparate immune phenotypes between the in-vitro-R and in-vivo-R systems suggest that the functional effects of tumor Arid1a on cancer immunity are dependent on the context in which Arid1a deletion occurred. 

In vivo tumor Arid1a loss promoted an immune desert microenvironment 

Having confirmed that tumor Arid1a status played an essential role in immune surveillance of gastric cancer, we sought to delineate the effects of in vivo tumor Arid1a loss on the tumor immune microenvironment. As we already found that T cells were necessary in Arid1a -mediated immune evasion, we measured the number of CD8 + T cells in the stomachs of transgenic mice. Rather than examining mice at the time of death, which was highly variable within and across genotypes, we examined the stomachs of 24-week-old mice, which is an age that we previously showed that these mice have invasive cancers on histology but not grossly ( Figure 2B ). We found that there was a progressive decrease in the number of CD8 + T cells in the stomachs of 

Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice, respectively (P < 0.01; Figure 3I ). We compared the immune microenvironments of 4 in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and 3 KO primary tumors via single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of a total of 22,836 cells. Immune cells comprised 20% of the total population in Arid1a WT tumors, compared to only 2% in Arid1a KO tumors ( Figure 3J ). These data, in sum, suggest that tumor Arid1a loss induced an immune desert phenotype. 26 We characterized the immune cell population in more detail and found that in in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO tumors, there was an expansion of the macrophage population and a decrease in the proportion of dendritic cells, T cells, and neutrophils ( Figure 3K ). Next, we used flow cytometry .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint to analyze the immune cell infiltration induced by in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids injected into the flanks of immunocompetent hosts 7 and 14 days post-injection. Of note, even though most in-vivo-R Arid1a WT injections eventually regress ( Figure 3E ), this immune elimination phase takes place over a 3- to 4-week time frame and thus at 7 and 14 days post-injection, the tumors were still present. While we did not see a difference in CD45 + immune cell infiltration between in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids at either time point ( Supplemental Figure 3L ), we did note a difference in T cell infiltration consistent with the scRNA-seq findings. At day 7, there were very few CD8 + cells in both in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumors, but by day 14, there were significantly more CD8 + cells in the in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumors (P < 0.01; Figure 3L ). Similarly, there was no difference in the number of CD4 + cells at day 7, but by day 14, there were significantly more CD4 + cells in the in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumors (P < 0.05; Figure 3M ). These results are consistent with our earlier findings demonstrating that T cells are key mediators in Arid1a induced immunity ( Figure 3E–H ) and align with the observed difference in CD8 + T-cell infiltration in transgenic mice stomachs ( Figure 3I ). Within the myeloid compartment, while we did not find a difference in pro-inflammatory F4/80 ⁺CD11b ⁺CD206 ⁻ macrophages ( Supplemental Figure 3M ), we did observe that in-vivo -R 

Arid1a KO tumors had significantly more immunosuppressive F4/80 ⁺CD11b ⁺CD206 +macrophages 7 days post-injection than Arid1a WT tumors (P < 0.05; Supplemental Figure 3N ). 27,28 

Tumor Arid1a loss blunted GM-CSF secretion and type II interferon response 

Since ARID1A is an essential component of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, we next performed ATAC-seq to compare the chromatin accessibility of in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids to identify the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for Arid1a -mediated immune evasion. Out of 81,751 consensus peaks identified, 23,758 were significantly different .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint between in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Only 464 peaks were upregulated, while 23,294 peaks were downregulated in the in-vivo -R Arid1a KO lines. Thus, Arid1a loss induced an overall more closed chromatin state in our gastric cancer tumoroids ( Figure 4A ), a finding that is consistent with previous work done by us and others that show Arid1a loss reduces chromatin accessibility. 21,22 

A key step to initiate the cancer immunity cycle is the recruitment of immune cells to the tumor immune microenvironment to unleash a feed forward cycle for further activation and recruitment of anti-tumor actors, a process that is supported by cytokine secretion by cancer and immune cells. 29 When we examined the loci of 32 key cytokines, we found that 20 were significantly closed with Arid1a loss ( Figure 4B ). Next, we measured cytokine levels in conditioned media from in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids and we found markedly different inflammatory secretomes, with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids producing 6 cytokines that were at least 5-fold higher than Arid1a KO tumoroids. Of these 6 cytokines, 5 had more closed loci in in-vivo-R

Arid1a KO tumoroids on ATAC-seq ( Figure 4B ). Finally, when we analyzed bulk RNA-seq data from the tumoroids, we found that of these 5 cytokines with markedly closed chromatin in Arid1a 

KO tumoroids, only the expression of Csf2 , which encodes GM-CSF, was significantly lower in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids. This suggests that GM-CSF expression was most likely under the direct control of Arid1a , whereas the other differentially secreted cytokines may be due to transcriptional or post-translational modifications. Notably, GM-CSF was the second highest differentially secreted cytokine with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids producing a 174-fold higher amount than Arid1a KO tumoroids (P < 0.05; Figure 4B ). GM-CSF plays a key role in dendritic cell recruitment and maturation. 30 Thus, we asked if in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids can more effectively attract dendritic cells. We performed a migration assay for monocytes, which are one precursor of dendritic cells, using conditioned .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint media produced by in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids and found that media from Arid1a 

WT tumoroids led to significantly more monocyte migration (P < 0.05; Figure 4C ). Next, we compared the number of dendritic cells in tumor draining lymph nodes of mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids and found that there were significantly more CD11c + cells in the tumor draining lymph nodes of mice bearing in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids (P = 0.05; 

Figure 4D ). We then co-cultured tumoroids directly with dendritic cells and found that 93% of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids had dendritic cells touching them as compared to only 18% of 

Arid1a KO tumoroids (P < 0.0001; Figure 4E ). Notably, we also found that a higher proportion of dendritic cells co-cultured with Arid1a WT tumoroids expressed activation markers than those co-cultured with Arid1a KO tumoroids (P < 0.05; Figure 4F ). In sum, our findings suggest that tumor Arid1a loss reduced tumor GM-CSF secretion, which lessened dendritic cell recruitment into the tumor immune microenvironment, and blunted the initiation of the cancer immunity cycle to promote immune evasion. Finally, we tested the necessity of GM-CSF for immune clearance of Arid1a WT cancer cells. We injected in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids into the flanks of immunocompetent host mice treated with anti-GM-CSF antibodies and found that while anti-GM-CSF treatment induced an initial growth of tumor in the first two weeks after injection, the tumors all eventually regressed (Figure 4G ). These data demonstrated that other mechanisms must also be involved in Arid1a -mediated immune clearance as blocking GM-CSF alone was not sufficient to phenocopy Arid1a 

loss. 

To identify other tumor cell-autonomous factors that contribute to Arid1a -mediated immune clearance beyond GM-CSF, we compared the RNA-seq data of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids and found that Ifngr1 expression was significantly higher in Arid1a WT tumoroids (Figure 4H ), which we validated with qPCR ( Figure 4I ). This finding correlated with the bulk .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint RNA-seq data of the primary tumors from transgenic mice that showed the IFN-γ response pathway (HALLMARK_INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE; Figure 3A ) was the most differentially expressed gene set between murine Arid1a WT and KO tumors. On review of the ATAC-seq data we found that the Ifngr1 locus was more closed in the Arid1a KO tumoroids (Figure 4J ). Finally, we confirmed that Arid1a KO tumoroids had reduced total IFNGR1 protein expression via Western blotting ( Figure 4K ) and less IFNGR1 on cell surface via flow cytometry (P < 0.001; Figure 4L; Supplemental Figure 4A ). IFNGR1 is the ligand binding component of the IFN-γ receptor heterodimer complex and is essential to initiating the type II interferon response. 31 Thus, we sought to further interrogate the role that type II interferon signaling played in Arid1a mediated immune evasion. Based on the reduced expression of Ifngr1 , we hypothesized that in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids would mount a blunted response to IFN-γ. We exposed in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids to exogenous IFN-γ in vitro and measured cell surface MHC-I expression, which is upregulated as part of the type II interferon signaling response and a critical component of the tumor-immune escape mechanism. We found that while at baseline, there was very low MHC-I expression on the surface of both Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids, Arid1a WT tumoroids expressed significantly more cell surface MHC-I upon IFN-γ exposure (P < 0.001; Figure 4M; Supplemental Figure 4B ). We also observed that IFN-γ treatment induced a significantly higher increase in Cxcl9 ,

Cxcl10 , and Cxcl11 expression in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids ( Figure 4N ), further confirming that in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids had blunted type II interferon response. 

Arid1a -null cancers can be eradicated with the induction of a robust immune response 

We next sought to identify strategies to treat Arid1a -deficient tumors that evaded immune clearance by blunting the cancer immunity cycle initiation. Since we found that Arid1a loss led to tumor cell-autonomous reduction in GM-CSF secretion and Ifngr1 expression, we expected that .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint tumor Arid1a loss hinders immune clearance via local, rather than systemic, mechanisms. To test if in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids released or induced systemic factors that are sufficient to clear Arid1a KO tumoroids, we performed concomitant injection of both in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into contralateral flanks of the same mice, positing that if there were any systemic anti-tumor factors induced by Arid1a WT tumoroids, then the KO cells would also be eradicated. However, we found that 100% of Arid1a KO tumoroids engrafted, consistent with tumor Arid1a 

mediating only local effects ( Supplemental Figure 4C ). Next, we tested PD-1/PD-L1 blockade as a therapeutic strategy against Arid1a -null cancer cells. Since we previously found that in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cancer cells excluded T cell infiltration into the tumors, we hypothesized that anti-PD-L1/PD-1 therapy will not affect tumor growth since this class of treatment requires the presence of T cells for effect. We first injected in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO cells into the flanks of syngeneic immunocompetent mice, and upon the tumors reaching 200 mm 3, the mice were treated with either control IgG or anti-PD-1 antibodies. We found no difference in tumor growth ( Supplemental Figure 4D ). Next, we treated in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO mice with PBS or anti-PD-L1 antibody. We initiated weekly injections at 24 weeks of age, when these mice were known to have at least intramucosal cancer ( Figure 2B ) and again, found no difference in survival (Supplemental Figure 4E ). Since Arid1a mediated local effects in the tumor immune microenvironment, we hypothesized that provoking a robust local immune reaction would eradicate in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells. To test this theory, we leveraged the adaptive immune system that establishes immunologic memory which provides a rapid and robust response upon re-exposure to antigens. We injected in-vivo-

R Arid1a WT tumoroids into immunocompetent mice and waited 80 days, during which time immunologic memory could develop. Using mice that cleared this initial exposure, we re-challenged them with in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids injected into the contralateral flank. We .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint found that only 38% of injections led to engraftment ( Supplemental Figure 4F ), which is markedly less than the 73% engraftment rate when in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids were injected into naïve hosts (P < 0.01; Figure 3E ). These results showed that in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids share neoantigens that primed the immune system to clear a re-exposure and confirm that in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids can be immunologically eradicated, provided that a strong enough immune reaction is induced. The cGAS–STING pathway is a central innate immune sensing axis that induces type I interferon and pro-inflammatory cytokine programs to promote dendritic cell activation and T cell priming, thereby enhancing anti-tumor immunity. 32 We tested intratumoral injections of the STING agonist diamidobenzimidazole (diABZI), as a therapeutic option. 33 First, we engrafted in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells into the flanks of syngeneic immunocompetent hosts and one day later injected diABZI into the tumor site, followed by weekly injections. We found that diABZI treatment prevented tumor growth (P < 0.0001; Supplemental Figure 4G ). Notably, even once we stopped diABZI therapy, we saw only a low rate of tumor regrowth, demonstrating that this strategy can completely eradicate cancer cells. We next tested diABZI treatment in established tumors. We engrafted in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells into the flanks of syngeneic immunocompetent mice, and upon the tumors reaching a mean size of 400 mm 3, we performed intratumoral injection of diABZI, which provided significant tumor control (P < 0.0001; Figure 4O ), with nearly half the tumors showing complete regression ( Supplemental Figure 4H ). To confirm that diABZI initiated a robust immune response, we used flow cytometry to analyze immune cell infiltration after diABZI treatment. We found while there was no difference in viable immune cells ( Supplemental Figure 4I ), there was a trend toward a higher proportion of CD3 +T cells (P = 0.06; Supplemental Figure 4J ), most notably in the CD8 + population (P < 0.05; 

Figure 4P ). Importantly, diABZI treatment induced a higher proportion of T effector memory .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint (TEM) cells (P < 0.05; Figure 4Q ) and antigen experienced TEM cells (P < 0.05; Figure 4R ), which suggest an activated adaptive immunity response. 

In vitro tumor Arid1a deletion did not affect GM-CSF or type II interferon response 

We next asked how Arid1a status in in-vitro-R tumoroids, which had Arid1a deleted in vitro ,affected tumoroid cytokine production. We found that in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids had a markedly different secretome pattern as compared to the in-vivo-R tumoroids. Most notably, GM-CSF production was not significantly different between the two genotypes in the in-vitro-R tumoroids ( Figure 5A ). Consistent with the lack of difference in GM-CSF secretion, we found that in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids attracted a similar number of dendritic cells while in co-culture (66% vs 71%, respectively; P = NS; Figure 5B ). Next, we tested how Arid1a status in in-vitro-R tumoroids affected their response to IFN-γ

exposure. First, RNA-seq of in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids showed no difference in 

Ifngr1 expression, which we confirmed with qPCR ( Figure 5C and Supplemental Figure 5A ). Consistent with the RNA level findings, we found that there was no clear difference in IFNGR1 protein expression between in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids on Western blots ( Figure 5D ) or on flow cytometry ( Figure 5E ). Finally, when we exposed in-vitro-R tumoroids to exogenous IFN-γ, we did not find any differences between Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids in type II interferon responses as determined by cell surface MHC-I expression ( Figure 5F ) and induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines ( Figure 5G ). We next compared the effects of Arid1a loss on the transcriptomes in in-vivo-R and in-vitro-Rtumoroids. Using bulk RNA-seq we found that out of the top 80 most differentially expressed genes between in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids, few showed similar differential expression patterns when in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids were compared ( Figure 5H ). .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Similarly, when we analyzed the top 80 most differentially expressed genes between in-vitro-R

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids, we did not see a similar expression pattern when in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids were analyzed ( Figure 5I ). These data demonstrated that Arid1a 

loss induced different transcriptomic changes based on whether Arid1a deletion occurred in vitro versus in vivo .

Tumor ARID1A mutation effect on human gastric cancer immunity differed based on molecular subtype 

Human gastric adenocarcinoma is molecularly heterogeneous, with four major subtypes: Epstein–Barr virus-positive (EBV), microsatellite instability (MSI), chromosomal instability (CIN), and genomically stable (GS). 15 EBV and MSI subtypes comprise 7-10% and 10-22%, respectively, of gastric adenocarcinoma, while the majority of gastric adenocarcinomas are CIN or GS. 15 To determine which of the four TCGA subtypes our in-vivo-R Arid1a murine tumors most resembled, we developed a cross-species classification framework that projected mouse bulk RNA-seq expression profiles onto four TCGA groups ( Supplemental Figure 6A ). All 11 in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumors were classified as GS with high predicted subtype probability. Among 

Arid1a Het samples, 6 of 7 (86%) were classified as GS and 1 of 7 (14%) as CIN. In the Arid1a 

KO group, 8 of 11 (73%) were classified as GS and 3 of 11 (27%) as CIN. No samples in any genotype were classified as EBV or MSI. Thus, we concluded that the in-vivo-R Arid1a tumors most resembled the GS subtype. To determine the association between ARID1A mutations and cancer immunity in human patients, we interrogated The Cancer Genome Atlas gastric adenocarcinoma cohort (TCGA STAD) comprised of 440 samples, of which 50 were GS and 6 of the 50 (12%) harbored 

ARID1A loss-of-function (LOF) mutations. We performed GSEA comparing GS ARID1A WT and mutant tumors and found that mutants were depleted for immune related hallmark gene sets, .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint such as ALLOGRAFT_REJECTION, INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE, and INTERFERON_ALPHA_RESPONSE, as compared to ARID1A WT samples ( Figure 6A; Supplemental Figure 6B ), consistent with the findings in our transgenic mouse model where tumor Arid1a loss resulted in immune-depleted phenotypes. We next compared the level of IFN-γ–driven immune activation in the tumor microenvironment using a 6-gene IFN-γ signature and found that ARID1A LOF tumors had significantly lower IFN-

> γ

signature scores compared to ARID1A WT tumors (mean −0.59 vs +0.06; P < 0.0001; Figure 6B ). 34 Notably, all 6 GS ARID1A LOF samples uniformly had negative IFN-γ signature z-scores (Figure 6C ). When we examined the individual IFN-γ pathway genes we observed that IDO1 ,

CXCL9 , CXCL10 , and HLA-DRA were all reduced in ARID1A mutant tumors as compared to WT tumors (all P < 0.05; Figure 6D ). Finally, immune deconvolution analysis demonstrated significantly lower infiltration of T cells, cytotoxic cells, and CD8+ cells in ARID1A LOF mutant samples compared to ARID1A WT tumors (all P < 0.05; Figure 6E ). Overall, these results were consistent with the immune exclusion phenotype observed in our in-vivo-R Arid1a KO model. Next, we compared the immune phenotype of ARID1A mutants in the CIN subtype, which is the other major molecular subtype of gastric cancers. In direct contrast to the GS samples, GSEA comparing the 16 CIN ARID1A LOF mutants to the 207 CIN ARID1A WT samples showed that the ARID1A mutant samples were enriched for multiple immune pathways ( Figure 6F; Supplemental Figure 6C ) and there was no difference in the 6-gene IFN-γ signature scores (Figure 6G ). Notably, when we reviewed the CIN-subtype ARID1A LOF tumors individually, we found that there were highly heterogeneous IFN-γ scores, with 8 samples scoring above and the other 8 scoring below zero ( Figure 6H ). Overall, these results were consistent with the concept that the immune effect of ARID1A mutations was related to the context in which they occur. In .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint particular, the immunosuppressive phenotype associated with ARID1A LOF is specific to the GS molecular context, consistent with our findings in our mouse and tumoroid models. 

DISCUSSION 

In this study, we compared two isogenic gastric cancer models that differed only in the context in which ARID1A was deleted and found markedly different effects on gastric cancer immunity. When tumor Arid1a loss occurred in vitro , Arid1a deletion did not affect the cancer cells’ immune evasion proficiency. However, in an autochthonous genetically engineered mouse model, in which tumor cells developed in vivo over months, Arid1a -null cancer cells capable of T cell-dependent immune escape emerged, leading to shortened survival for mice. Mechanistically, we found that autochthonous tumor Arid1a loss reprogrammed the immune microenvironment into a desert phenotype via blunting of GM-CSF production and type II interferon response. Finally, we confirmed that the correlation between ARID1A LOF mutations and immune activation in human gastric cancer samples was dependent on tumor molecular subtype. The functional results and immune profiling that we found in autochthonous tumors and in human samples argue that ARID1A status intersects with immune surveillance in a manner that is not apparent in immune-naïve, in vitro based model systems. While our in vivo findings connect ARID1A to discrete steps of the cancer immunity cycle, the disparate immune phenotypes between tumor cells that had Arid1a deleted in vitro versus in vivo demonstrate that the immune-evasive program observed in in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumors is not an obligate, immediate consequence of Arid1a deletion. Instead, our findings in preclinical models suggest that the immune consequences of tumor Arid1a loss are shaped by non-tumor cell-autonomous contexts. This hypothesis is supported by our findings in the TCGA dataset where ARID1A -.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint mutant tumors had decreased IFN-γ pathway activity only in the GS subtype samples, and not in the CIN group. Our current study builds upon previous work that demonstrated the importance of context when determining ARID1A functional effects in cancer. 8,21,35,36 Specifically, in gastric adenocarcinoma, the molecular underpinning of the cancer is an essential context that must be considered as related to tumor ARID1A functionality. The TCGA identified four distinct molecular subtypes of gastric adenocarcinoma. 15 ARID1A alterations are particularly enriched in EBV-positive and MSI subtypes, which are themselves associated with higher baseline immunogenicity and responsiveness to immune checkpoint blockade. 3 In this study, we explored immune-related programs within the GS and CIN subtypes, which comprise the large majority of gastric adenocarcinomas, and found that GS ARID1A mutant tumors were immune-cold, consistent with our murine model, while CIN ARID1A mutant tumors were inflamed. Another recent study also considered how tumor-autonomous context determines ARID1A functionality by stratifying gastric cancers by Lauren histology into diffuse-type and intestinal-type, which are loosely associated with the GS and CIN subtypes, respectively. 15,37,38 Diffuse-type gastric cancers have more frequent peritoneal metastases, are less sensitive to chemotherapy, and are associated with worse outcomes. 39,40 The authors observed that ARID1A mutations in diffuse-type gastric cancer are associated with a poorer prognosis, but improved outcomes in intestinal-type tumors. In addition, the proteomes between the two groups were also markedly different. 37 While the above study did not investigate the underlying mechanisms, it provides additional evidence that the effects of ARID1A mutations in gastric cancer are complex and the context in which these alterations occur may result in distinct or even opposing biological consequences. Our finding that the immunogenic effect of tumor ARID1A loss is context-dependent provides an explanation for the contradictory conclusions in the literature regarding ARID1A functionality as .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint related to cancer immunity. 3-8 The disparate results in the literature may be due to differences across studies in various confounding factors that include, but are not limited to, tumor type, cooperating genomic alterations, timing of mutation acquisition, and the immune contexts (or lack thereof) in which the models form. A key implication of our data is that consideration of tumor ARID1A loss and immunogenicity must account for other variables. In support of this concept are recent studies indicating that ARID1A -associated immune phenotypes depend on cooperating oncogenic context, such as BRAF V600E in melanoma and MYCN amplification in neuroblastoma. 8,36 An important direction for future research is to delineate the molecular mechanisms by which various contexts shape how tumor ARID1A interacts with host factors to determine the immunogenicity of developing or established malignancies. Prior work in multiple epithelial malignancies demonstrates that ARID1A loss promotes tumor progression and metastasis, which we also observed with Arid1a deletion regardless of whether its loss occurred in vitro or in vivo .7,21,35 However, tumor suppressor loss is not solely selected because it increases proliferative capacity. Tumor evolution occurs under multiple constraints, including immune surveillance, and accumulating evidence indicates that tumor suppressor alterations can also be selected for their ability to facilitate immune escape. 41 In our study, the disparate immune phenotypes that we observed between the in-vitro-R and in-vivo-R systems may be considered using the immunoediting framework where tumor immunogenicity reflects the immunologic environment from which a cancer clone arises. Immune-mediated elimination and equilibrium impose selective constraints that ultimately favor outgrowth of clones capable of evading immune clearance. 13,14 Within this framework, the developing in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumors were “sculpted” by the host immune system to select for clones that suppressed GM-CSF and IFNGR1 production that facilitated immune evasion. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint The heterogeneous and context-dependent effects of ARID1A mutations have direct implications for clinical translation as ARID1A mutation status is being evaluated as a stratification biomarker in immunotherapy trials. However, our data argue that ARID1A status alone is likely to be non-specific. Consistent with this thesis, we found that PD-1/PD-L1 blockade did not provide measurable benefit in the Arid1a KO mice. At the same time, our results indicate that Arid1a -deficient tumors are not intrinsically resistant to immune-mediated elimination. Rather, the immune-evasive state is associated with impaired initiation of the cancer immunity cycle, suggesting that approaches that provide strong innate activation and local immune priming may be effective. Consistent with this, a primed adaptive immune state reduced subsequent engraftment of Arid1a KO tumoroids relative to naïve hosts, indicating that shared tumor antigens can support clearance when a sufficiently robust immune response is induced. Furthermore, intratumoral administration of the diABZI STING agonist prevented engraftment and provided tumor control in Arid1a KO tumors, supporting a therapeutic strategy focused on restoring immune initiation in ARID1A -deficient, immune-excluded settings. 

Several limitations of our study should be noted. First, the autochthonous tumors evolved with non-immune stromal compartments, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts, that shaped the immune microenvironment, while in vitro tumoroids develop in the absence of stromal input prior to transplantation. The relative contribution of the non-immune stromal components to the divergent phenotypes between the in vivo and in vitro systems therefore could not be fully resolved by the current study and should be a subject for future work. Second, since we performed immune profiling at early post-transplantation time points and at endpoint disease in autochthonous tumors, longitudinal analyses would refine the kinetics by which Arid1a status shapes immune recruitment versus exclusion. Finally, although we identify impaired GM-CSF output and attenuated IFN-γ responsiveness as major tumor-intrinsic mechanisms associated .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint with Arid1a loss, these axes are unlikely to be exhaustive as ARID1A controls chromatin accessibility at a global level. 

CONCLUSION 

In conclusion, our study identified immune selection pressure as a critical context that determined how tumor ARID1A interacted with the cancer immunity cycle. We showed that 

ARID1A loss was not sufficient to confer immune evasion but could promote immune escape after prolonged in vivo tumor development under immune pressure. Our findings argue that tumor ARID1A mutation status alone should not be interpreted as a uniform, pan-cancer determinant of immunogenicity or immune checkpoint blockade response without considering other contexts. More broadly, incorporation of immunoediting history into model design will be essential for defining the true immune consequences of tumor genomic alterations and for translating those insights into clinically actionable biomarker and therapeutic strategies. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We acknowledge the assistance of the Tissue Management Shared Resource, the Quantitative Light Microscopy Core, and the Data Science Shared Resource, all of which are shared resources at the UT Southwestern Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center and supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI; P30CA142543). We also acknowledge the UT Southwestern Whole Brain Microscopy Facility (RRID: SCR_017949), for use of whole slide scanning resources. 

R.T.H. and J.D.K. were supported by UT Southwestern Training Resident Doctors as Innovators in Science awards from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund (1018897). M.F.P. was supported by the NCI (3R37CA265967-01A1S1) and the American College of Surgeons Resident Research Scholarship. S.L.N. was supported by the UT Southwestern M.D. Scientist Training Program and Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract Residents and Fellows Research Award. T.H.H. was supported by the NCI (R01CA276690) and from the Department of Defense (CA190578), Schmidt Sciences through the Mayo Clinic Foundation, and the Torrey Coast Foundation. S.T.G.H. was supported by the NCI (R37CA265967, R01CA276690). H.Z. was supported by the Mark Foundation for Cancer Research (21-003-ELA), the Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center (P30CA142543), the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (RP220614), and the NIH (DP1DK139976, R01CA251928). I.S.C. was supported by the Susan G. Komen Career Catalyst Award (1010879) and the NCI (K08CA270188). S.C.W. is a UT Southwestern Disease Oriented Clinical Scholar and was supported by NCI (R37CA265967, R01CA276690). 

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS 

T.H.H. is a co-founder of Kure.ai therapeutics and has received consulting fees from IQVIA; these affiliations and financial compensations are unrelated to the current paper. H.Z. is a co-.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint founder of Quotient Therapeutics and Jumble Therapeutics and serves as an advisor for Newlimit; these affiliations are unrelated to the current paper. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint REFERENCES 

1. Kadoch, C., Hargreaves, D.C., Hodges, C., Elias, L., Ho, L., Ranish, J., and Crabtree, G.R. (2013). Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes identifies extensive roles in human malignancy. Nat Genet 45 , 592-601. 10.1038/ng.2628. 2. Sun, X.X., Chuang, J.C., Kanchwala, M., Wu, L.W., Celen, C., Li, L., Liang, H.Q., Zhang, S.Y., Maples, T., Nguyen, L.H., et al. (2016). Suppression of the SWI/SNF Component Arid1a Promotes Mammalian Regeneration. Cell Stem Cell 18 , 456-466. 10.1016/j.stem.2016.03.001. 3. Shen, J., Ju, Z., Zhao, W., Wang, L., Peng, Y., Ge, Z., Nagel, Z.D., Zou, J., Wang, C., Kapoor, P., et al. (2018). ARID1A deficiency promotes mutability and potentiates therapeutic antitumor immunity unleashed by immune checkpoint blockade. Nat Med 24 ,556-562. 10.1038/s41591-018-0012-z. 4. Brodeur, M.N., Dopeso, H., Zhu, Y., Longhini, A.L.F., Gazzo, A., Sun, S., Koche, R.P., Qu, R., Rosenberg, L., Hamard, P.J., et al. (2024). Interferon response and epigenetic modulation by SMARCA4 mutations drive ovarian tumor immunogenicity. Sci Adv 10 ,eadk4851. 10.1126/sciadv.adk4851. 5. Maxwell, M.B., Hom-Tedla, M.S., Yi, J., Li, S., Rivera, S.A., Yu, J., Burns, M.J., McRae, H.M., Stevenson, B.T., Coakley, K.E., et al. (2024). ARID1A suppresses R-loop-mediated STING-type I interferon pathway activation of anti-tumor immunity. Cell 187 , 3390-3408.e3319. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.04.025. 6. Li, J., Wang, W., Zhang, Y., Cieslik, M., Guo, J., Tan, M., Green, M.D., Wang, W., Lin, H., Li, W., et al. (2020). Epigenetic driver mutations in ARID1A shape cancer immune phenotype and immunotherapy. J Clin Invest. 10.1172/JCI134402. 7. Li, N., Liu, Q., Han, Y., Pei, S., Cheng, B., Xu, J., Miao, X., Pan, Q., Wang, H., Guo, J., et al. (2022). ARID1A loss induces polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cell chemotaxis and promotes prostate cancer progression. Nature Communications 13 ,7281. 10.1038/s41467-022-34871-9. 8. Watson, P.M., DeVaux, C.A., and Freeman, K.W. (2025). Loss of ARID1A leads to a cold tumor phenotype via suppression of IFNgamma signaling. Sci Rep 15 , 8716. 10.1038/s41598-025-91688-4. 9. Okamura, R., Kato, S., Lee, S., Jimenez, R.E., Sicklick, J.K., and Kurzrock, R. (2020). ARID1A alterations function as a biomarker for longer progression-free survival after anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy. J Immunother Cancer 8. 10.1136/jitc-2019-000438. 10. Gu, Y., Zhang, P., Wang, J., Lin, C., Liu, H., Li, H., He, H., Li, R., Zhang, H., and Zhang, W. (2023). Somatic ARID1A mutation stratifies patients with gastric cancer to PD-1 blockade and adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother 72 , 1199-1208. 10.1007/s00262-022-03326-x. 11. Abou Alaiwi, S., Nassar, A.H., Xie, W., Bakouny, Z., Berchuck, J.E., Braun, D.A., Baca, S.C., Nuzzo, P.V., Flippot, R., Mouhieddine, T.H., et al. (2020). Mammalian SWI/SNF complex genomic alterations and immune checkpoint blockade in solid tumors. Cancer Immunology Research, canimm.0866.2019. 10.1158/2326-6066.Cir-19-0866. 12. Jing, H., Zhang, X., and Meng, L. (2025). Swinging the SWI/SNF complexes for cancer therapy. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 46 , 907-921. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2025.07.008. 13. Schreiber, R.D., Old, L.J., and Smyth, M.J. (2011). Cancer immunoediting: integrating immunity's roles in cancer suppression and promotion. Science 331 , 1565-1570. 10.1126/science.1203486. 14. Roerden, M., and Spranger, S. (2025). Cancer immune evasion, immunoediting and intratumour heterogeneity. Nat Rev Immunol 25 , 353-369. 10.1038/s41577-024-01111-8. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N. (2014). Comprehensive molecular characterization of gastric adenocarcinoma. Nature 513 , 202-209. 10.1038/nature13480. 16. Gao, X., Tate, P., Hu, P., Tjian, R., Skarnes, W.C., and Wang, Z. (2008). ES cell pluripotency and germ-layer formation require the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling component BAF250a. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 , 6656-6661. 10.1073/pnas.0801802105. 17. Drost, J., van Jaarsveld, R.H., Ponsioen, B., Zimberlin, C., van Boxtel, R., Buijs, A., Sachs, N., Overmeer, R.M., Offerhaus, G.J., Begthel, H., et al. (2015). Sequential cancer mutations in cultured human intestinal stem cells. Nature 521 , 43-47. 10.1038/nature14415. 18. Grzelak, C.A., Goddard, E.T., Lederer, E.E., Rajaram, K., Dai, J., Shor, R.E., Lim, A.R., Kim, J., Beronja, S., Funnell, A.P.W., and Ghajar, C.M. (2022). Elimination of fluorescent protein immunogenicity permits modeling of metastasis in immune-competent settings. Cancer Cell 40 , 1-2. 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.11.004. 19. Shimada, S., Mimata, A., Sekine, M., Mogushi, K., Akiyama, Y., Fukamachi, H., Jonkers, J., Tanaka, H., Eishi, Y., and Yuasa, Y. (2012). Synergistic tumour suppressor activity of E-cadherin and p53 in a conditional mouse model for metastatic diffuse-type gastric cancer. Gut 61 , 344-353. 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300050. 20. Burclaff, J., Osaki, L.H., Liu, D., Goldenring, J.R., and Mills, J.C. (2017). Targeted Apoptosis of Parietal Cells Is Insufficient to Induce Metaplasia in Stomach. Gastroenterology 152 , 762-766.e767. 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.12.001. 21. Sun, X.X., Wang, S.C., Wei, Y.L., Luo, X., Jia, Y.M., Li, L., Gopal, P., Zhu, M., Nassour, I., Chuang, J.C., et al. (2017). Arid1a Has Context-Dependent Oncogenic and Tumor Suppressor Functions in Liver Cancer. Cancer Cell 32 , 574-+. 10.1016/j.ccell.2017.10.007. 22. Xu, C., Huang, K.K., Law, J.H., Chua, J.S., Sheng, T., Flores, N.M., Pizzi, M.P., Okabe, A., Tan, A.L.K., Zhu, F., et al. (2023). Comprehensive molecular phenotyping ofARID1A-deficient gastric cancer reveals pervasive epigenomic reprogramming and therapeutic opportunities. Gut. 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-328332. 23. Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B.L., Gillette, M.A., Paulovich, A., Pomeroy, S.L., Golub, T.R., Lander, E.S., and Mesirov, J.P. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102 , 15545-15550. 10.1073/pnas.0506580102. 24. Dighe, A.S., Richards, E., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (1994). Enhanced in vivo growth and resistance to rejection of tumor cells expressing dominant negative IFN gamma receptors. Immunity 1, 447-456. 10.1016/1074-7613(94)90087-6. 25. Shankaran, V., Ikeda, H., Bruce, A.T., White, J.M., Swanson, P.E., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (2001). IFNgamma and lymphocytes prevent primary tumour development and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature 410 , 1107-1111. 10.1038/35074122. 26. Chen, D.S., and Mellman, I. (2017). Elements of cancer immunity and the cancer-immune set point. Nature 541 , 321-330. 10.1038/nature21349. 27. Bianchi, A., De Castro Silva, I., Deshpande, N.U., Singh, S., Mehra, S., Garrido, V.T., Guo, X., Nivelo, L.A., Kolonias, D.S., Saigh, S.J., et al. (2023). Cell-Autonomous Cxcl1 Sustains Tolerogenic Circuitries and Stromal Inflammation via Neutrophil-Derived TNF in Pancreatic Cancer. Cancer Discov 13 , 1428-1453. 10.1158/2159-8290.Cd-22-1046. 28. Adrover, J.M., Han, X., Sun, L., Fujii, T., Sivetz, N., Daßler-Plenker, J., Evans, C., Peters, J., He, X.-Y., Cannon, C.D., et al. (2025). Neutrophils drive vascular occlusion, tumour necrosis and metastasis. Nature 645 , 484-495. 10.1038/s41586-025-09278-3. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 29. Mellman, I., Chen, D.S., Powles, T., and Turley, S.J. (2023). The cancer-immunity cycle: Indication, genotype, and immunotype. Immunity 56 , 2188-2205. 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.09.011. 30. Dougan, M., Dranoff, G., and Dougan, S.K. (2019). GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 Family of Cytokines: Regulators of Inflammation. Immunity 50 , 796-811. 10.1016/j.immuni.2019.03.022. 31. Gocher, A.M., Workman, C.J., and Vignali, D.A.A. (2022). Interferon-γ: teammate or opponent in the tumour microenvironment? Nature Reviews Immunology 22 , 158-172. 10.1038/s41577-021-00566-3. 32. Lanng, K.R.B., Lauridsen, E.L., and Jakobsen, M.R. (2024). The balance of STING signaling orchestrates immunity in cancer. Nat Immunol 25 , 1144-1157. 10.1038/s41590-024-01872-3. 33. Ramanjulu, J.M., Pesiridis, G.S., Yang, J., Concha, N., Singhaus, R., Zhang, S.-Y., Tran, J.-L., Moore, P., Lehmann, S., Eberl, H.C., et al. (2018). Design of amidobenzimidazole STING receptor agonists with systemic activity. Nature 564 , 439-443. 10.1038/s41586-018-0705-y. 34. Ayers, M., Lunceford, J., Nebozhyn, M., Murphy, E., Loboda, A., Kaufman, D.R., Albright, A., Cheng, J.D., Kang, S.P., Shankaran, V., et al. (2017). IFN-gamma-related mRNA profile predicts clinical response to PD-1 blockade. J Clin Invest 127 , 2930-2940. 10.1172/JCI91190. 35. Wang, S.C., Nassour, I., Xiao, S., Zhang, S., Luo, X., Lee, J., Li, L., Sun, X., Nguyen, L.H., Chuang, J.C., et al. (2019). SWI/SNF component ARID1A restrains pancreatic neoplasia formation. Gut 68 , 1259-1270. 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315490. 36. Okada, M., Yamasaki, S., Nakazato, H., Hirahara, Y., Ishibashi, T., Kawamura, M., Shimizu, K., and Fujii, S.I. (2024). ARID1A-Deficient Tumors Acquire Immunogenic Neoantigens during the Development of Resistance to Targeted Therapy. Cancer Res 

84 , 2792-2805. 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2846. 37. Shi, W., Wang, Y., Xu, C., Li, Y., Ge, S., Bai, B., Zhang, K., Wang, Y., Zheng, N., Wang, J., et al. (2023). Multilevel proteomic analyses reveal molecular diversity between diffuse-type and intestinal-type gastric cancer. Nat Commun 14 , 835. 10.1038/s41467-023-35797-6. 38. Lauren, P. (1965). The Two Histological Main Types of Gastric Carcinoma: Diffuse and So-Called Intestinal-Type Carcinoma. An Attempt at a Histo-Clinical Classification. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand 64 , 31-49. 10.1111/apm.1965.64.1.31. 39. Lee, J.H., Chang, K.K., Yoon, C., Tang, L.H., Strong, V.E., and Yoon, S.S. (2018). Lauren Histologic Type Is the Most Important Factor Associated With Pattern of Recurrence Following Resection of Gastric Adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg 267 , 105-113. 10.1097/sla.0000000000002040. 40. Jiménez Fonseca, P., Carmona-Bayonas, A., Hernández, R., Custodio, A., Cano, J.M., Lacalle, A., Echavarria, I., Macias, I., Mangas, M., Visa, L., et al. (2017). Lauren subtypes of advanced gastric cancer influence survival and response to chemotherapy: real-world data from the AGAMENON National Cancer Registry. British Journal of Cancer 117 , 775-782. 10.1038/bjc.2017.245. 41. Hoyos, D., Zappasodi, R., Schulze, I., Sethna, Z., de Andrade, K.C., Bajorin, D.F., Bandlamudi, C., Callahan, M.K., Funt, S.A., Hadrup, S.R., et al. (2022). Fundamental immune-oncogenicity trade-offs define driver mutation fitness. Nature 606 , 172-179. 10.1038/s41586-022-04696-z. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals 

All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Texas (UT) Southwestern Medical Center and conducted in accordance with institutional guidelines. Mice were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions on a 12-hour light/dark cycle at 20–26 °C and 30–70% relative humidity, with food and water provided ad libitum . All mice were maintained on a C57BL/6 background (backcrossed ≥6 generations). Mice carrying floxed alleles of Trp53 (#008462), Cdh1 (005319), and the Rosa26 LSL-eYFP reporter allele (006148) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. Mice carrying floxed Arid1a alleles were kindly provided by Dr. Hao Zhu (UT Southwestern Medical Center). Mice carrying the Atp4b-Cre allele were kindly provided by Dr. Sam Yoon (Columbia University). Experimental cohorts were generated by intercrossing Trp53 flox/flox ;

Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP ; Arid1a +/flox parents to ensure all experimental animals were littermate controls. Resulting offspring carried Atp4b-Cre ; Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP and differed exclusively in Arid1a zygosity: Arid1a +/+ (wild-type), Arid1a +/flox (heterozygous), or Arid1a flox/flox (knockout). All analyses were performed in an age- and sex-matched manner unless otherwise indicated in the figure legends. 

Genotyping was performed using the KAPA2G Fast HS Genotyping Mix (7961316001, Roche Diagnostics) in a total reaction volume of 11 μL containing 5 μl KAPA2G Fast HS Genotyping Mix, 4 μL water, 0.5 μL forward primer (5 μM), 0.5 μL reverse primer (5 μM), and 1 μL template DNA. PCR cycling conditions were identical for all alleles: initial denaturation at 95°C for 3 min; 30 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, 58°C for 20 s, and 72°C for 45 s; followed by a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. PCR products were resolved on a 2% agarose gel in 1× TAE buffer containing .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint ethidium bromide and run at 200V for 40–45 min. All primers and expected band sizes are listed in the resource table. 

Tumoroid culture media formulation 

The basal medium was prepared using Advanced Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F12 (12634-028, Invitrogen) and supplemented with HEPES (10 mM; 15630-080, Invitrogen), GlutaMAX (1X; 35050-061, Invitrogen), penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/mL / 100 μg/mL; 15140-148, Invitrogen), N2 supplement (1x; 17502-048, Invitrogen), B27 supplement (1X; 17504-044, Invitrogen), N-acetylcysteine (1 mM; A9165, Sigma-Aldrich), and bovine serum albumin, Fraction V (1%; BP1600, Fisher Scientific) 

The complete medium was prepared by supplementing the basal medium with noggin: 100 ng/mL (HY-P70558, MedChemExpress), epidermal growth factor: 50 ng/mL (HY-P700051AF, MedChemExpress), fibroblast growth factor 10: 100 ng/mL (HY-P7048, MedChemExpress), R-spondin 1: 100 ng/mL (HY-P7114, MedChemExpress), Wnt3a: 100 ng/mL (HY-P70453B, MedChemExpress), gastrin I: 10 nM (HY-P1097, MedChemExpress), and Y-27632 ROCK inhibitor: 10 μM (ATCC, ACS3030). 

Establishing cell lines from mouse tumors 

Tumors were harvested from mice stomachs and washed three times in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 1× penicillin-streptomycin. The tumor was minced to pieces smaller than 1-2 mm³ and incubated with enzymatic cocktail comprised of 2 mg/mL collagenase type IV and 0.1 mg/mL DNase I in PBS. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour with inversion every 10 minutes. The reaction was stopped by adding an equal volume of DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and the mixture was passed through a 70-μm cell strainer. The cell suspension was centrifuged .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint at 300 × g for 5 minutes at room temperature, the supernatant was aspirated, and the pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were seeded into a 10-cm dish and cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO ₂. Cells were routinely passaged every three days using TrypLE Express (12604013, Thermo Fisher Scientific) dissociation and re-seeded at the desired density for maintenance. 

Establishing tumoroids from mouse tumors 

Tumors were harvested from mice stomachs and washed three times in ice-cold PBS with 1% penicillin-streptomycin. The tissue was minced into 1–2 mm³ pieces and incubated in a digestion buffer containing collagenase type IV and DNase I dissolved in Advanced DMEM/F12. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 1 hour with gentle shaking. The suspension was filtered through a 70-μm cell strainer, centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C, and washed once with cold basal medium. Tumoroids were resuspended in 50 μL domes of Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel (356230, Corning) in pre-warmed 48-well plates. After polymerization, 200 μL of complete medium was added. Medium was changed every 2–3 days. Tumoroids were passaged every 5–7 days at a ratio of 1:5. For passaging, the culture medium was removed, and ice-cold PBS was added to dissolve the Matrigel. The tumoroid suspension was transferred to a 15 mL conical tube. Mechanical dissociation was performed by pipetting the suspension using a fire-polished glass Pasteur pipette. Care was taken to avoid excessive pipetting to prevent dissociation into single cells. The fragments were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in fresh Matrigel for re-plating and cultured at 37°C in 5% CO ₂.

To ensure the genetic purity of the tumor cells, tumoroids were subjected to selection by nutlin-3a (SML0580, MilliporeSigma), which was added to the culture medium at 10 μM for a period of 14 days. Following this selection phase, cultures were examined using fluorescence .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint microscopy. Only lines confirmed to be 100% YFP-positive were selected and maintained for subsequent experiments. 

Flank injections 

Tumor cells were harvested via 0.25% trypsin-EDTA and were then counted and resuspended in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. 1,000,000 cells (total volume 100 μL) were injected. Tumoroids were expanded, harvested, and washed three times with cold PBS. Cells were dissociated to single cells using TrypLE Express, counted, and resuspended in basal medium mixed 1:1 with Matrigel. 300,000 cells (total volume 200 μL) were injected. Tumors were measured with calipers, and tumor volumes were calculated using the formula: ( π/6) x length x width 2. Mice were monitored until tumors reached institutional endpoint criteria or pre-determined endpoint. 

Tail vein injections 

Tumor cells were harvested via 0.25% trypsin-EDTA and filtered through a 40 μm strainer and resuspended in cell media. 1,000,000 viable cells in 100 μL of complete media were injected via the lateral tail vein using a 28-gauge needle. Tumoroid lines were harvested from Matrigel and dissociated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA. They were then filtered through a 40 μm strainer and resuspended in complete media. 300,000 viable cells in 100 μL of complete media were injected via the lateral tail vein using a 28-gauge needle. Mice were monitored for health and euthanized 2–8 weeks later for lung collection and histologic analysis. 

Immunohistochemistry 

Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and subjected to antigen retrieval using 10% Citra buffer (HK0809K, Biogenex Laboratories) microwaved for 20 minutes in a water bath. After cooling, slides were quenched in .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3% H ₂O₂ in methanol, blocked with 1.5% serum in PBS-Tween for 1 hour, and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody. The next day, slides were washed and incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody, followed by incubation with VECTASTAIN® Elite ABC-HRP Kit (PK6101 and 6104, Vector Laboratories) for 30 minutes. DAB (SK-4100, Vector Laboratories) was used as the chromogen, and slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, rinsed, and mounted with permanent mounting media. 

Immunofluorescence 

Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and subjected to antigen retrieval using 10% Citra buffer microwaved for 20 minutes in a water bath. After cooling, slides were quenched in 3% H ₂O₂ in methanol, blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS-Tween for 1 hour, and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody. The following day, slides were washed and incubated with a fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. After washing, slides were mounted using a DAPI-containing antifade mounting medium (P36935, Invitrogen) and stored at 4°C protected from light until imaging. 

Overexpressing ARID1A in cell lines 

Arid1a knockout cell lines were transfected with the PT3-EF1a-hArid1a-T2A-Puromycin plasmid using Lipofectamine 3000 (L3000008, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Formulated lipid-DNA complexes were added to cells at 70% confluency. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, stable transformants were selected by adding 2 μg/mL of puromycin to the culture medium. Following selection, single-cell clones were isolated via limiting dilution and expanded. 

In vitro induction of gene mutations 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To induce Cre-mediated gene recombination, organoids were dissociated into small clusters using TrypLE Express. The cell suspension was incubated with Adenovirus-Cre (VVC-U of Iowa-5 Ad5CMVCre, Viral Vector Core, University of Iowa, USA) supernatant. The cells were reseeded in Matrigel and cultured in complete medium. One week post-transduction, cultures were checked for YFP expression by fluorescence microscopy. 

Exogenous interferon-  treatment of tumoroids 

Tumoroids were seeded and cultured for 24 hours under standard conditions. Culture medium was removed and replaced with fresh complete medium supplemented with recombinant mouse IFN-γ (575304, Biolegend) at 20 ng/mL. The tumoroids were incubated at 37°C for 24 hours and then analyzed. 

Flow cytometry of tumoroids 

Tumoroid lines were harvested from Matrigel and dissociated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA. They were then filtered through a 40 μm strainer and centrifuged at 300x g for 7 minutes. Pellets were resuspended in blocking buffer (1 μL rat anti-mouse CD16/32 (553142, BD Pharmingen) per 70 

> μ

L staining buffer (00-4222-26, Invitrogen)) and incubated at 4°C for 15 minutes. Primary antibody and fixable viability dye (L34992, Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in staining buffer was added to each tube, and cells were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C in the dark. After washing, cells were fixed in 150 μL of fixation buffer (00-8222-49, Invitrogen) and stored at 4°C protected from light until analysis (within 72 hours). 

Immune cell isolation and co-culture establishment 

Spleens were harvested from mice and dissociated using the Spleen Dissociation Kit (130-095-926, Miltenyi Biotec). Dendritic cells and CD8 + T cells were isolated using the Pan Dendritic Cell Isolation Kit (130-100-875, Miltenyi Biotec) and CD8a + T Cell Isolation Kit (130-104-075, Miltenyi .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Biotec), respectively. For tumoroid preparation, a split-sample quantification strategy was used to preserve 3D structure: one aliquot was enzymatically digested to single cells for counting, while the matching aliquot (containing tumoroid fragments) was used for seeding. Tumoroid fragments were mixed with immune cells at a ratio of 1:200, resuspended in RPMI 1640 + 10% FBS, and mixed with Matrigel (final concentration 30%). Co-cultures were maintained in RPMI 1640 + 10% FBS. 

In vivo immune cell depletion 

Mice received intraperitoneal injections of depleting antibodies (200 μg/injection) starting 3 days prior to tumor challenge and continuing every 3 days until Day 18. The following antibodies were used (BioXCell): anti-CD8a (Clone 53-6.7), anti-CD4 (Clone GK1.5). Controls: rat IgG2a (Clone 2A3) and rat IgG2b (Clone LTF-2). Depletion was confirmed by flow cytometry of peripheral blood. 

Microscopic imaging and quantification of dendritic cell recruitment 

Dendritic cells were labeled with CellTracker™ Deep Red (C34565, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in RPMI 1640 for 1 hour at 37°C prior to co-culture. Tumoroids were identified by their intrinsic YFP expression, and dendritic cells were visualized via the CellTracker™ Deep Red fluorescence. Dendritic cell and tumoroid co-cultures were imaged using a fluorescence microscope Leica DMi8. Images were acquired from random fields of view for each condition. The degree of interaction was determined by counting the number of dendritic cells co-localized with individual tumoroids. 

diABZI administration 

diABZI (S8796, Selleck Chemicals) was prepared fresh each day in 5% DMSO and 95% corn oil on at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg at a final volume of 100 μL. For treatment of established tumors, .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint diABZI was injected into the flank tumors at days 21, 28, and 35. Tumors were harvested for flow cytometry 72 hours following the last injection. For diABZI treatment of newly-injected tumoroids, 100 μL of diABZI was injected into the marked flanks 1, 7, and 14 days after tumoroids injection. 

Flow cytometry of flank tumors 

Subcutaneous tumors were harvested, washed in cold PBS, and then dissociated into single-cell suspensions using the Tumor Dissociation Kit (130-096-730, Miltenyi Biotec), passed through a 40 μm cell strainer, washed with cold staining buffer, and incubated with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (553142, BD Pharmingen) for 10 minutes at 4°C. The specific fluorophore-conjugated antibodies were added to the cell suspension. The samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C in the dark. Following incubation, cells were washed twice with cold staining buffer. For overnight storage, the final cell pellets were resuspended in 200 μL of a 1:1 mixture of Flow Cytometry Staining Buffer (00-4222-26, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and IC Fixation Buffer (00-8222-49, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were stored at 4°C in the dark overnight, and data acquisition was performed the following day on an Attune NxT Flow Cytometer or the Aurora Spectral flow cytometer, depending on the assay. The acquired data were analyzed using FlowJo (version 11). 

Cytokine analysis 

Conditioned media were harvested from tumoroid cultures following a 48-hour incubation period. All harvesting and processing steps were performed on ice. The entire well contents, comprising both the culture medium and the Matrigel dome, were collected and mechanically disrupted using wide-bore pipette tips. The suspension was centrifuged at 4°C and supernatant was filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer and stored at -70°C. Cytokine levels were quantified using the Mouse Cytokine 32-Plex Discovery Assay (Eve Technologies, Calgary, AB, .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Canada). To normalize cytokine secretion data, the cell pellet from the centrifugation step was dissociated into single cells using TrypLE Express and counted. Final cytokine concentrations were calculated by normalizing the results to the total cell number per well. 

ATAC-sequencing preparation 

Tumoroids were harvested and washed with ice-cold PBS. 100,000 cells were processed using the ATAC-Seq Kit (53150, Active Motif). Nuclei were permeabilized and confirmed by Trypan Blue staining and tagmented. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 2000. 

Tumor bulk RNA sequencing preparation 

Snap-frozen tumor tissue collected from mice was homogenized in TRIzol™ using a bead mill. RNA was purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit (74104, Qiagen). Libraries were constructed using the NEBNext® Ultra™ II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit (E7760L, New England Biolabs) and sequenced on an Illumina MiniSeq. Tumoroids were harvested from culture and washed three times with ice-cold PBS and the tumoroids were resuspended in TRIzol™ Reagent (15596026, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and homogenized by vortexing. RNA was purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq. 

Tumor single-cell RNA sequencing preparation 

Stomach tumors were harvested from mice and washed in ice-cold PBS. The tissue was dissociated into single-cell suspensions using the Tumor Dissociation Kit (130-096-730, Miltenyi Biotec) and passed through a 70-μm cell strainer and debris was removed using the Debris Removal Solution (130-109-398, Miltenyi Biotec). Single-cell suspensions were chemically fixed using the Fixation Kit (ECFC3300, Parse Biosciences). Fixed cells were stored at -70°C until library preparation. For library construction, samples were thawed, and barcoding was performed using the Evercode™ Whole Transcriptome Kit (ECWT3300, Parse Biosciences). .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Cells were pooled, redistributed, and subjected to subsequent rounds of ligation to append unique combinatorial barcodes. Following barcoding, cells were lysed, and the library was amplified and purified. The final library concentration and size distribution were assessed using Agilent TapeStation. The resulting scRNA-seq libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 2000 system using paired-end sequencing protocols compatible with the Parse Biosciences pipeline. A 5% PhiX control library spike-in was added to the sequencing run to ensure library diversity. 

Quantitative reverse-transcription PCR 

Tumoroids were harvested on ice. The dome and medium were collected, centrifuged, and washed twice with cold PBS before lysis in TRIzol™. RNA was purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was synthesized using the LunaScript® RT SuperMix Kit (E3010, New England Biolabs). A total of 2 μg of RNA was used per 40 μL reaction. The reverse transcription reaction was carried out in a thermocycler with the following conditions: primer annealing: 25°C for 2 minutes, cDNA synthesis: 55°C for 10 minutes, heat inactivation: 95°C for 1 minute. The resulting cDNA was used as a template for qPCR analysis. qPCR was performed using SYBR Green Master Mix (1708880EDU, Bio-Rad) and run on a QuantStudio 3 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Relative gene expression was calculated using the ΔΔ Ct method. 

Statistical analyses 

Data are presented as mean ± SEM unless otherwise indicated, and the statistical test for each panel is specified in the corresponding figure legend. GraphPad Prism (version 11) was utilized. 

ATAC-seq data analysis 

Raw read quality was assessed with FastQC (v0.11.9) 1. Adapters and low-quality bases were removed in paired-end mode with Trim Galore (v0.6.7) 2. Reads were aligned to the mouse .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint reference genome (UCSC mm10) with BWA-MEM (v0.7.17) 3, and secondary alignments were removed with SAMtools (v1.16.1) 4. PCR duplicates were marked with Picard MarkDuplicates (v3.0.0) 5. Aligned reads were then filtered with BamTools (v2.5.2) 6 and SAMtools (v1.16.1) 4 to remove unmapped or multi-mapped reads (MAPQ < 1), improperly paired reads, soft-clipped reads, reads with excessive mismatches (>4), read pairs with abnormally large insert sizes (>2 kb), and reads overlapping regions in the ENCODE mm10 blacklist v2 7 or mitochondrial DNA (chrM). To address the 9-bp duplication introduced by Tn5 transposition, the filtered alignments were shifted with deepTools (v3.5.6; alignmentSieve --ATACshift) 8. Open-chromatin narrow peaks were then called per sample on the shifted alignments with MACS2 (v2.2.9.1; --format BAMPE --nomodel --shift -100 --extsize 200 --keep-dup all) 9. Per-sample ATAC-seq quality metrics, including TSS enrichment and fragment-size distribution, were assessed with ataqv (v1.3.1) 10 . Differential accessibility analysis was performed with DiffBind (v3.12.0) 11,12 in R (v4.3.3). Differential peaks were then annotated to the nearest gene with ChIPpeakAnno (v3.36.0) 13,14 . Locus-level chromatin-accessibility tracks at candidate genes were visualized with Gviz (v1.46.1) 15 .

Tumoroid RNA sequencing data analysis 

Adapters and low-quality bases were trimmed from paired-end RNA-seq reads with Trim Galore (v0.6.4) 2. Trimmed reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome (UCSC mm10) with STAR (v2.4.2a; --alignSJoverhangMin 8 --alignSJDBoverhangMin 1 --alignIntronMin 20 --alignIntronMax 1000000 --alignMatesGapMax 1000000) 16 . PCR duplicates were marked and removed with Picard MarkDuplicates (v2.10.3) 5 and SAMtools (v1.8) 4. Gene-level read counts were quantified in un-stranded mode with Subread featureCounts (v1.6.1) 17 . Differential expression analysis (knockout vs. wild-type) was performed with DESeq2 (v1.42.0) 18 in R (v4.3.3). Gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed with the fgsea package 19 (v1.28.0) against the MSigDB mouse Hallmark collection. 20 .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Mouse tumor bulk RNA sequencing data analysis 

Gastric cancer RNA-seq libraries were quantified against the mouse reference transcriptome (GRCm39) with Salmon 21 and summarized to gene level using tximport. 22 Gene-level counts were analyzed with DESeq2 18 (design ~ batch + genotype, across three sequencing batches); sample sex was excluded from the model owing to confounding with genotype. Genes with CPM > 1 in at least as many samples as the smallest genotype group were retained. Differential expression between homozygous Arid1a knockout (Homo) and wild-type (WT) tumors was assessed using the Wald test with WT as reference and Benjamini–Hochberg correction, with adjusted p < 0.05 considered significant. Variance-stabilizing-transformed counts were used for principal-component and sample-distance quality control, and Ensembl identifiers were annotated with biomaRt. 23 

Gene set enrichment analysis (mouse) 

Genes were ranked by the DESeq2 18 Wald statistic (duplicate symbols collapsed to the largest absolute value) and tested against the MSigDB mouse Hallmark collection 20 using fgsea 19 (gene sets of 15–500 genes, 1,000 permutations), with normalized enrichment scores and Benjamini– Hochberg–adjusted p-values reported. 

Gene set enrichment analysis of TCGA-STAD samples 

RNA-seq expression and somatic mutation data from TCGA STAD PanCancer Atlas cohort (stad_tcga_pan_can_atlas_2018) were obtained via the cBioPortal 24,25 REST API, and patients with documented TCGA subtypes of genomically stable (GS) and chromosomal instability (CIN) subtypes were extracted. ARID1A loss-of-function (LOF) was defined from somatic mutation calls (Entrez 8289) as a nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site/splice-region mutation, with all remaining tumors in each subtype designated wild-type (WT), yielding 6 LOF/44 WT (GS) and .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16 LOF/207 WT (CIN). Within each subtype, genes were ranked between LOF and WT, computed on the log2 RSEM values provided by cBioPortal. Pre-ranked GSEA against the MSigDB Hallmark collection 20 (50 gene sets) was performed with fgsea 19 (gene sets of 15–500 genes, 1,000 permutations, fixed random seed), with FDR < 0.05 considered significant. 

Cross-species molecular subtype classification 

Mouse bulk RNA-seq profiles were projected onto the four TCGA molecular subtypes of gastric adenocarcinoma (EBV, MSI, CIN, GS) using 13,072 one-to-one mouse–human orthologs (Ensembl BioMart 23 ). A Prediction Analysis of Microarrays (PAM) nearest shrunken centroid classifier 26 was trained on 274 TCGA STAD bulk RNA primary tumors with documented TCGA subtypes, using the top 100 markers per subtype selected by limma 27 one-versus-rest differential expression (FDR < 0.05, log2 fold change > 0.25). The classifier was applied to 29 samples from in-vivo-R mice stomach tissue (WT n = 11, Het n = 7, KO n = 11) and subsequently predicted each subtype. The genotype–subtype association was evaluated by Fisher's exact test and a 1,000-permutation genotype-label test. 

Single cell RNA sequencing 

Library Prep and Preprocessing 

Single cell RNA-seq libraries were prepared using Parse Biosciences split-pool combinatorial barcoding chemistry 28 from gastric tissue of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT (N = 4) and in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO (N = 4) mice. Libraries were sequenced on the Singular Genomics G4 platform. Raw reads were processed through the Parse Biosciences Trailmaker pipeline aligned to the mouse genome GRCm38 to generate per-cell gene expression matrices. Gene identifiers were retained as Ensembl IDs (ENSMUSG format) throughout all analyses and converted to gene symbols via org.Mm.eg.db 29 (Bioconductor 3.18) at the reporting stage. The Trailmaker-exported Seurat 30 object contained 36,239 cells across the 8 samples. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Quality control filtered cells with nFeature_RNA >= 200, percent.mt <= 20, doublet scores <= 0.4. Sample_F6 ( in-vivo-R Arid1a KO, female) was excluded due to sample-level technical failure: median nFeature_RNA of 257 (vs. cohort range 325-548 for other samples). The final primary atlas comprised 22,836 cells across 7 samples (4 in-vivo-R Arid1a WT: M1, M6, sample_F3, sample_F4; 3 in-vivo-R Arid1a KO: M3, M5, F2_6) after quality control metrics. 

To augment cell-type resolution secondary to our modest sequencing depth (median 483 genes/cell, median 1,315 UMIs/cell) — we integrated 18,930 cells from an independently generated gastric single cell RNA-seq reference dataset from the same mouse genetic background ( Atp4b-Cre; Cdh1 flox/flox ; Trp53 flox/flox ). These reference samples were processed on the same Parse Biosciences + Singular G4 platform and exhibited substantially higher per-cell gene detection (median 1,069-1,770 genes/cell across samples), providing a high-resolution cell-type identity scaffold. Quality control for the reference dataset was matched to the experimental cohort (nFeature_RNA >= 200, percent.mt <= 20, doublet score <= 0.4). These samples were not included in the final analysis and served as anchors to help with cell-type resolution. Normalization and integration Experimental and Reference datasets were merged, which provided 41,766 cells across ten samples. Normalization was performed using SCTransform 31,32 (sctransform v0.4.2) with the glmGamPoi 33 method for accelerated parameter estimation. Batch correction was performed using Harmony 34 (v1.2.4) on the sample variable (7 AridSingular + 3 reference samples), with theta=2 and the top 30 principal components as input after evaluating elbow plots. Integration quality was assessed using silhouette analysis on a 5,000-cell subsample. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint UMAP 35 dimensional reduction was computed from the Harmony-corrected embedding (30 dimensions). Shared nearest-neighbor graph construction and Louvain 36 clustering were performed at four resolutions (0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0) to assess cluster stability. Resolution 0.5 (20 clusters) was selected as the primary working resolution based on cluster coherence and biological interpretability. Cell type annotations Annotation was performed initially of broad compartments (Epithelial, Immune, Stromal). For each of the 20 clusters at resolution 0.5, differentially expressed genes were identified using Seurat's 30 FindMarkers (v5.0.3) (Wilcoxon rank-sum test, SCT assay, min.pct = 0.1, logfc.threshold = 0.25) against all other clusters. Gene symbols were mapped from Ensembl IDs via org.Mm.eg.db. 29 Module scores (Seurat AddModuleScore) were computed for 27 canonical cell-type marker panels spanning gastric epithelial lineage, immune populations (T cell: Cd3e, Cd3d ; B cell: Cd19, Cd79a ; myeloid: Itgam, Cd68, Lyz2 ; plasma: Jchain, Mzb1 ), and stromal cells (fibroblast: Col1a1, Dcn, Pdgfra ; endothelial: Pecam1, Cdh5 ). Mean module scores per cluster were used to generate proposed annotations, with confidence assessed by the margin between the top- and second-scoring panels. Twelve clusters were assigned to the Epithelial compartment, six to Immune, and two to Stromal. Due to modest resolution, the Epithelial clusters were collapsed to one single compartment. All single cell analyses were performed in R (v4.3.1) with Seurat (v5.0.3), sctransform (v0.4.2), Harmony (v1.2.4), glmGamPoi (v1.14.3), and org.Mm.eg.db (v3.16.0, Bioconductor 3.18) on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9.4 (BioHPC cluster, UT Southwestern). Complete analysis scripts for each stage will be deposited to an online repository. Key parameter choices (QC thresholds, Harmony theta, clustering resolutions) were evaluated through systematic sensitivity analyses. .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint SUPPLEMENTAL REFERENCES 

1 FastQC: A Quality Control tool for High Throughput Sequence Data. 2 Trim Galore! 3 Li, H. Aligning sequence reads, clone sequences and assembly contigs with BWA-MEM. 

arXiv 1303.3997 (2013). 4 Li, H. et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25 ,2078-2079 (2009). 5 Picard toolkit (2019). 6 Barnett, D. W., Garrison, E. K., Quinlan, A. R., Strömberg, M. P. & Marth, G. T. BamTools: a C++ API and toolkit for analyzing and managing BAM files. Bioinformatics 

27 , 1691-1692 (2011). 7 Amemiya, H. M., Kundaje, A. & Boyle, A. P. The ENCODE Blacklist: Identification of Problematic Regions of the Genome. Scientific Reports 9, 9354 (2019). 8 Ramírez, F. et al. deepTools2: a next generation web server for deep-sequencing data analysis. Nucleic Acids Research 44 , W160-W165 (2016). 9 Zhang, Y. et al. Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biology 9, R137 (2008). 10 Orchard, P., Kyono, Y., Hensley, J., Kitzman, J. O. & Parker, S. C. J. Quantification, Dynamic Visualization, and Validation of Bias in ATAC-Seq Data with ataqv. Cell Systems 10 , 298-306.e294 (2020). 11 DiffBind: Differential binding analysis of ChIP-Seq peak data (2011). 12 Ross-Innes, C. S. et al. Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with clinical outcome in breast cancer. Nature 481 , 389-393 (2012). 13 Zhu, L. J. in Tiling Arrays: Methods and Protocols (eds T. L. Lee & A. C. Shui Luk) 105-124 (Humana Press, 2013). 14 Zhu, L. J. et al. ChIPpeakAnno: a Bioconductor package to annotate ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip data. BMC Bioinformatics 11 , 237 (2010). 15 Hahne, F. & Ivanek, R. in Statistical Genomics: Methods and Protocols (eds E. Mathé & S. Davis) 335-351 (Springer, 2016). 16 Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29 , 15-21 (2013). 17 Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30 , 923-930 (2014). 18 Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15 , 550 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8 19 Korotkevich, G., Sukhov, V., Budin, N., Shpak, B., Artyomov, M.N., & Sergushichev, A. 20 Liberzon, A., Birger, C., Thorvaldsdóttir, H., Ghandi, M., Mesirov, J.P., & Tamayo, P. 21 Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A. & Kingsford, C. Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14 , 417-419 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4197 22 Soneson, C., Love, M. I. & Robinson, M. D. Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Res 4, 1521 (2015). https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.7563.2 23 Durinck, S., Spellman, P. T., Birney, E. & Huber, W. Mapping identifiers for the integration of genomic datasets with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nat Protoc 4, 1184-1191 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2009.97 24 Cerami, E. et al. The cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov 2, 401-404 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0095 .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25 Gao, J. et al. Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the cBioPortal. Sci Signal 6, pl1 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004088 26 Tibshirani, R., Hastie, T., Narasimhan, B. & Chu, G. Diagnosis of multiple cancer types by shrunken centroids of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 , 6567-6572 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.082099299 27 Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43 , e47 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv007 28 Rosenberg, A. B. et al. Single-cell profiling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcoding. Science 360 , 176-182 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam8999 29 Carlson, M. Vol. 3.16.0 (Bioconductor, 2022). 30 Hao, Y. et al. Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell analysis. Nat Biotechnol 42 , 293-304 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01767-y31 Hafemeister, C. & Satija, R. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol 20 , 296 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1874-1 32 Choudhary, S. & Satija, R. Comparison and evaluation of statistical error models for scRNA-seq. Genome Biol 23 , 27 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-021-02584-9 33 Ahlmann-Eltze, C. & Huber, W. glmGamPoi: fitting Gamma-Poisson generalized linear models on single cell count data. Bioinformatics 36 , 5701-5702 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa1009 34 Korsunsky, I. et al. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat Methods 16 , 1289-1296 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0619-035 McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. arXiv (2018). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426 36 Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R. & Lefebvre, E. Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 

2008 , P10008 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/p10008 .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 0 1 2 3 4 5 6036912 15 Days Tumoroid Size (x10 4 μm2)

CB

> 500-300-700-1500-200-75-

Deleted Wild-type 

in-vitro -R Arid1a Arid1a 

KO KO WT WT 

J

> 100 μm

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Arid1a KO H

10 17 24 31 38 45 52 59 66 73 80 87 94 101 108 115 122 129 136 0500 1000 1500 2000 Tumor Volume (mm 3)Days After Injection 

> NSG

Arid1a KO-1 Arid1a KO-1 

Arid1a KO-2 Arid1a KO-2 

Arid1a WT-2 Arid1a WT-2 

Arid1a WT-1 Arid1a WT-1 

> in-vitro -R
> ***

G

> 100 μm
> H&E ARID1A YFP

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Arid1a KO I

> Proportion Engrafted (%)

15 30 020 40 60 80 100 0% 0% 

> Immunocompetent

N: 20 20 85% 95% 020 40 60 80 100 Proportion Engrafted (%) 

> NSG

F

> Proportion Engrafted (%)

15 30 020 40 60 80 100 0% 0% 

in-vitro -R Arid1a 

KO KO WT WT 

in-vitro -R Arid1a 

KO KO WT WT NS 

ED

> 100 μm
> Brightfield IF

ARID1A 

β-ACTIN 

in-vitro -R 

E-CADHERIN 

50 37 250 150 100 75 50 TRP53 

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Arid1a KO 

> In vitro

Arid1a KO-1 Arid1a KO-1 

Arid1a KO-2 Arid1a KO-2 

Arid1a WT-2 Arid1a WT-2 

Arid1a WT-1 Arid1a WT-1 

> in-vitro -R
> ****

Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ;Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP ; Arid1a +/+ Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ;Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP ; Arid1a flox/flox 

Ad-Cre 

Establish gastric organoids 

Analyses 

Nutlin-3a selection 

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT 

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT 

Arid1a WT Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Arid1a KO 

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a KO 

in-vitro -R 

Arid1a KO 

AFigure 1 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 1. In vitro Arid1a deletion in gastric cancer tumoroids promoted tumor growth but not immune evasion. 

(A) Schematic of tumoroid generation with in vitro Arid1a deletion. These tumoroids are termed 

in-vitro -R Arid1a wild-type (WT) or in-vitro -R Arid1a knockout (KO). 

(B) Representative genotyping PCR of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids after Cre recombination. 

(C) Western blots for ARID1A, E-CADHERIN, TRP53, and β-ACTIN from in-vitro -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids after Cre recombination. See also Supplemental Figure 1. 

(D) Representative brightfield (top) and immunofluorescence (IF; bottom) images of in-vitro -R 

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids after Cre recombination. 

(E) Tumoroid size over time measured by live imaging for in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO lines. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison of pooled WT (N = 184) vs pooled KO (N = 140) tumoroids through day 6 by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction; asterisks denote the time × genotype interaction. 

(F) Proportion of NSG mice that developed engrafted tumors following flank injection of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Proportions compared via Fisher's exact test. 

(G) Representative H&E (top), ARID1A (middle), and YFP (bottom) expression in tumors generated from NSG mice injected with in-vitro -R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. 

(H) Tumor volume over time following flank injection of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into NSG mice. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison of pooled WT (N = 20) vs pooled KO (N = 22) genotypes through day 80 (last shared timepoint) by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction; asterisks denote the time × genotype interaction. 

(I) Proportion of syngeneic immunocompetent mice that developed engrafted tumors following flank injection of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Proportions compared via Fisher's exact test. 

(J) Representative H&E of tissue from syngeneic immunocompetent mice 4 months after flank injection of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids, showing collagenized scar without residual carcinoma. NS, non-significant, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001.   

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint β-ACTIN
> Positive
> Control
> in-vitro -R Arid1a
> KO KO WT WT 250 50 75 150 100 20 37 15
> 250 50 75 150 100 20 37 15 TRP53 Positive
> Control
> in-vitro -R Arid1a
> KO KO WT WT

B 

> 250 50 75 150 100 20 37 15
> E-CADHERIN
> Positive
> Control
> in-vitro -R Arid1a
> KO KO WT WT

A 

> β-ACTIN
> Positive
> Control
> in-vitro -R Arid1a
> KO KO WT WT 250 50 75 150 100 20 37 15

Supplemental Figure 1 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 1. Related to Figure 1. 

Full Western blots of in-vitro -R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids after Cre recombination, probed for (A) E-CADHERIN and β-ACTIN and (B) TRP53 and β-ACTIN. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint YFP 

SM M

D

Arid1a KO Arid1a Het Arid1a WT H&E ARID1A 

> 100 μm

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 025 50 75 100 Age (weeks) Overall Survival (%) P < 0.001 N HR (95% CI) 

Arid1a WT 81 1.0 (Ref) 

in-vivo-R 

89 1.9 (1.3–2.8) Arid1a Het 80 2.3 (1.5–3.5) Arid1a KO 

C

Norma l Dysplasia CIS IMC Invasive cancer 15 10 911 10 911 87N: WT Het KO KO Het WT KO Het WT 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

5 days old 6 weeks old 24 weeks old 

B

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

> Proportio n

in-vivo -R 

Parietal cells 

Atp4b-Cre; Trp53 flox/flox ;Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP Arid1a +/+ (WT) 

Arid1a +/flox (Het) 

Arid1a flox/flox (KO) “in-vivo -R” }

in-vivo -R 

A

> *†
> H&E

* †

> *†

Liver Lungs 

> 100 μm

* †Liver Lungs GARID1A 

16% 60% 30% 020 40 60 80 Proportion with metastases (%) 

** 

> Metastases

F

> in-vivo -R  Arid1a

WT Het KO 45 57 53 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

N: WT Het KO 45 57 53 020 40 60 80 Proportion with EGE (%) 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

N: 

** 

> Extragastric extension

56% 25% 11% WT Het KO 

E

Arid1a WT Arid1a KO 

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a KO Arid1a Het IF K

> 100 μm

in-vivo -R 

Het KO ARID1A 

β-ACTIN 

J

250 37 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

150 100 E-CADHERIN 37 50 TRP53 

020 40 60 80 100 

> Ki-67+  Tumor Cells (% )

WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

Het 

W

in-vivo -R Arid1a KO M

ARID1A 

β-ACTIN 

+ OE1 OE2 37 250 

Present 

ARID1A 

Absent 

222 

LBrightfield 

010 20 30 40 

> Ki-67+  YFP+ (% )

V

WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 012345Days Tumoroid Size (x10 4 μm 2) WT-1 WT-2 KO-1 KO-2 KO-3 

U

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

> P = 0.07

76% 40% 

> Flank
> NSG

N: 17 15 

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

020 40 60 80 100 Proportion with metastases (%) 

T

OE: ARID1A GFP in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 020 40 60 80 100 Proportion with metastases (%) 

N: 8 8

88% 13% 

*

> Flank
> NSG

S

15 18 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

N: 

**** 

100% 13% 

> Tail Vein NSG

WT KO 020 40 60 80 100 Proportion with metastases (%) 

R

> H&E ARID1A
> 100 μm

Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Q in-vivo -R 

Arid1a WT Arid1a KO Brightfield 

> 100 μm
> IF

in-vivo -R 

P

WT KO ARID1A 

β-ACTIN 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

E-CADHERIN 

250 37 150 100 37 50 TRP53 

O

500-300-700-1500-200-75-Deleted Wild-type WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

NH

020 40 60 80 100 

> Successful Establishment (%)

645N: KO Het WT 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

50% 50% 0% 1000 500 Deleted Floxed Wild-type Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

+

I

Figure 2 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 2. In vivo tumor Arid1a loss in a genetically engineered mouse model promoted aggressive disease features and shortened survival. 

(A) Schematic of transgenic mouse model of gastric cancer, which had in vivo recombination (in-vivo -R) of all the floxed alleles, leading to autochthonous deletion of Trp53, Cdh1 , and 

Arid1a . Atp4b-Cre ; Trp53 flox/flox ; Cdh1 flox/flox ; Rosa26 LSL-eYFP/LSL-eYFP mice were generated with 

Arid1a +/+ (in-vivo -R Arid1a WT), Arid1a +/flox (in-vivo -R Arid1a Het), or Arid1a flox/flox (in-vivo -R 

Arid1a KO) backgrounds. Atp4b-Cre drives recombination selectively in gastric parietal cells. 

(B) Histologic assessment of gastric mucosa from in-vivo -R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice at 5 days, 6 weeks, and 24 weeks of age. Stacked bars show the proportion of mice with normal mucosa, dysplasia, carcinoma in situ (CIS), intramucosal carcinoma (IMC), or invasive cancer. 

(C) Kaplan–Meier overall survival curves for in-vivo -R Arid1a WT (N = 81), Het (N = 89; hazard ratio [HR] 1.9, 95% CI 1.3–2.8), and KO (N = 80; HR 2.3, 95% CI 1.5–3.5) mice. The curves were compared by log-rank test. 

(D) Representative H&E (top), ARID1A immunohistochemistry (middle), and YFP immunohistochemistry (bottom) of gastric tumors collected at time of death from in-vivo -R 

Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice. SM indicates submucosa, M denotes muscularis externa. 

(E) Top: Representative gross photographs of stomachs from in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO mice illustrating the absence or presence, respectively, of extragastric extension (EGE) of gastric cancer through the outer serosal layer. Bottom: Proportion of in-vivo -R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice with EGE at time of death. Proportions were compared by Fisher’s exact test. 

(F) Top: Distribution of metastatic sites (lymph nodes [LN], liver, and lungs) by genotype at time of death. Bottom: Proportion of in-vivo -R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice with gross metastases at time of death. Proportions were compared by Fisher’s exact test. 

(G) Representative gross photographs (top), H&E (middle), and ARID1A immunohistochemistry (bottom) of liver and lung metastases from in-vivo -R mice. Yellow arrowheads indicate metastatic nodules. Yellow stars mark metastatic carcinoma; green crosses indicate adjacent normal tissue. 

(H) Success rate of generating primary cell lines from gastric tumors of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice. 

(I) Representative genotyping PCR for Arid1a in in-vivo-R Arid1a Het and KO cell lines, showing floxed, wild-type, and deleted bands. +: positive control using non-recombined Arid1a Het tissue. 

(J) Western blot for ARID1A, E-CADHERIN, TRP53, and β-ACTIN in in-vivo-R Arid1a Het and KO cell lines. See also Supplemental Figure 2. 

(K) Representative brightfield (top) and immunofluorescence (IF; bottom) images of in-vivo-R

Arid1a Het and KO cell lines. 

(L) Proportion of in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cell clones with successful ARID1A overexpression. 

(M) Western blot for ARID1A and β-ACTIN in in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells with ARID1A 

overexpression (OE). +: positive control from ARID1A -expressing cell line. 

(N) Representative genotyping PCR for Arid1a in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(O) Western blot for ARID1A, E-CADHERIN, TRP53, and β-ACTIN in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(P) Representative brightfield (top) and IF (bottom) images of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(Q) Representative H&E (top) and ARID1A immunohistochemistry (bottom) in tumors generated from NSG mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. See also Supplemental Figure 2. 

(R) Proportion of NSG mice that developed gross lung metastases following tail vein injection of 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. See also Supplemental Figure 2. 

(S) Proportion of NSG mice that developed metastases following flank injection of in-vivo-R

Arid1a KO cells overexpressing (OE) ARID1A or GFP . Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(T) Proportion of NSG mice that developed metastases following flank injection of in-vivo-R

Arid1a Het or KO cell lines. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(U) Tumoroid size over time measured by live imaging for in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison of pooled WT (N = 168) vs pooled KO (N = 276) genotypes by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction. The time × genotype interaction was not significant. 

(V) Quantification of Ki-67 +YFP + cells as a percentage of total YFP + cells in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as individual data points with mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(W) Quantification of Ki-67 + tumor cells as a percentage of total tumor cells in gastric cancers from in-vivo-R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice. Data shown as individual data points with mean ± SEM and compared with Kruskal-Wallis test. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplemental Figure 2 

> 100 μm

Arid1a WT Arid1a KO YFP 

C

> H&E
> *†*†

D

> ARID1A *†
> 100 μm
> *†

WT KO 

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a 

+

> β-ACTIN
> 250 50 75 150 100 20 37

WT KO 

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a 

+TRP53 250 50 75 150 100 20 37 

> 250 50 75 150 100 20 37

WT KO 

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a 

+

> β-ACTIN
> 250 50 75 150 100 20 37

WT KO 

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a 

+E-CADHERIN 

B

> β-ACTIN

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

+250 50 150 100 20 37 15 

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

+250 50 150 100 20 37 15 TRP53 

> β-ACTIN

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

+

> 250 75 150 100 37 50 20 15
> 250 75 150 100 37 50 20 15 E-CADHERIN

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

+

A

in-vivo -R 

Arid1a WT Arid1a KO 

in-vivo -R 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 2. Related to Figure 2. 

(A) Full Western blots of in-vivo-R Arid1a cell lines probed for E-CADHERIN, TRP53, and β-ACTIN. 

(B) Full Western blots of in-vivo-R Arid1a tumoroids probed for E-CADHERIN, TRP53, and β-ACTIN. 

(C) YFP immunohistochemistry of tumors from NSG mice injected with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(D) Representative histologic images of lung metastases following tail vein injection of in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids into NSG mice. Yellow stars indicate carcinoma; green crosses indicate adjacent normal lung. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

G

> αCD4 +αCD8
> IgG
> αCD8

025 50 75 100 Proportion Engrafted (%)  * 

> NS 80%
> 50% 20%

H

in-vivo -R Arid1a WT 

Day 7 Day 14 

0510 15 20 25 

CD4 + Cells 

*M

Day 7 Day 14 

0510 15 20 

> % CD45 +CD3 +Cells

CD8 + Cells 

** L

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

in-vivo -R Arid1a KO 

025 50 75 100 % All Cells 

WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

T_cell B_cell Plasma_cell 

Macrophage 

Neutrophil DC Mast_cell 

K

025 50 75 100 % All Cells 

WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a UMAP_1 UMAP_2 

J

Epithelial Imm une 

Stromal 

I

010 20 

30 40 CD8+ cells / 0.25mm 2WT KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

Het 

** 

> 100 μm

Arid1a KO 

Arid1a Het 

Arid1a WT 

in-vivo -R 

αCD4+αCD8 (N=10) αCD8 (N=10) 

in-vivo -R Arid1a WT 

IgG (N=10) Days After Injection Tumor  Volume (mm 3)10 17 24 31 38 45 52 0500 1000 1500 NS **** 

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 93% 94% 

NS 

> Nude

F

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

46 32 

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

50 40 

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 

** 

32% 73% 

> Immuno-competent

E

N: 36 23 

100% 97% NS 020 

40 

60 

80 

100 Proportion Engrafted (%) WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

D

> NSG

Figure 3 C

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

Cxcl9 Cxcl10 Gzma Nkg7 

> 0.01 0.1
> 110 100
> Relative Expressio n

** **

A

-3 -2 -1 1 2 3Normalized Enrichment Score Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

8

6

4

20INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE 

> IL6 JAK STAT3 SIGNALING
> INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE
> ALLOGRAFT REJECTION Antigen processing and presentation

Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

Fold Change (log 2)

B Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

> Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 3. Tumor Arid1a loss promoted T cell–dependent immune evasion and an immune desert microenvironment. 

(A) Gene set enrichment analysis of bulk RNA-sequencing data from primary gastric tumors collected from in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO mice at time of death. Significantly enriched immune-related gene sets are highlighted. 

(B) Volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes between in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO primary tumors with genes in the INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE hallmark highlighted. 

(C) qPCR of selected genes. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Mann-Whitney U test. 

(D-F) in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids injected into the flanks of 

(D) NSG 

(E) syngeneic immunocompetent, and 

(F) athymic nude mice. Proportions of mice that developed tumors were compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(G) Tumor growth curves following flank injection of in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumoroids into immunocompetent mice treated with control IgG, anti-CD8 antibody, or combined anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison versus IgG control through day 52 by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction; asterisks denote the time × treatment interaction. 

(H) Proportion of immunocompetent mice that developed engrafted tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumoroids after treatment. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(I) Representative immunohistochemistry (left) and quantification (right) of CD8 + T cells in stomach sections from 24-week-old in-vivo-R Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Kruskal-Wallis test (P < 0.01) with Dunn's multiple comparisons test (WT vs Het, P = non-significant, and WT vs KO, P < 0.01). 

(J) Left: UMAP visualization of single-cell RNA-sequencing data from 22,836 cells from 4 in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and 3 KO primary tumors. Right: Proportional representation of epithelial, immune, and stromal cell populations. 

(K) Left: UMAP visualization of single-cell RNA-sequencing data from 2,265 immune cells from 4 in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and 3 KO primary tumors. Right: Proportional representation of immune cell subtypes. DC: dendritic cells. 

(L-M) Flow cytometric analysis of tumors from in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids 7 and 14 days after flank injection into syngeneic immunocompetent mice, measuring for infiltrated 

(L) CD8 + cells, 

(M) CD4 + cells. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared using Welch's t-test at each timepoint. NS, non-significant, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 100%
> 80%
> 76%
> αCD4 +αCD8
> IgG
> αCD8

025 50 75 100 Proportion Engrafted (%) Tumor  Volume (mm 3)10 17 24 31 

0500 1000 1500 2000 

Days After Injection 

αCD4+αCD8 (N=11) αCD8 (N=10) IgG (N=25) 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO NS 

P = 0.051 

J K

NS NS 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

Supplemental Figure 3 

I

CD4 CD8 

IgG anti-CD4 and CD8 65.7% 0.03% 20.9% 0.03% 

6% 75% 

*** 

12 16 KO Het 

> Proportion with metastases (% )

57% 75% N: 47

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO Het 

> P = NS

F

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> Intracardiac Injections Immunocompetent NSG

*

0510 15 20 25 

F4/80 +CD11b +

CD206 + Cells Day 7 Day 14 

*N

010 20 

30 40 

50 

F4/80 +CD11b +

CD206 - Cells Day 7 Day 14 

M% CD45 + Cells 

010 20 

30 40 

50 

> % Live Cells

CD45 + Cells Day 7 Day 14 

L

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT in-vivo -R Arid1a KO 

> Nude

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 NS 

G

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO OE : ARID1A GFP 

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 

*

38% 

> Immuno-competent

B

75% 0% 

ARID1A GFP 

12 8

*** 

> Intracardiac Injections Immunocompetent

E

> Proportion with metastases (% )

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 NSG 

OE : ARID1A GFP 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

N: 13 14 

79% 

38% P = 0.05 

*

75% 

24 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO OE : ARID1A GFP 

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 94% 94% 

> Proportion Engrafted (%)

NS 

> NSG

A

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 16 16 N: 16 100% 

4

OE : ARID1A GFP 

83% 

12 020 

40 

60 

80 

100 94% 100% NS 

> Nude

H

18 10 Het KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

26 24 

Het KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 27% 96% 

**** 

> Immuno-competent

D

020 

40 

60 

80 

100 Proportion Engrafted (%)  100% 97% NS 

C

> NSG

N: 40 31 

Het KO 

in-vivo -R Arid1a 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 3. Related to Figure 3. 

(A) Proportion of NSG mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a 

KO cells overexpressing ARID1A or GFP .

(B) Proportion of syngeneic immunocompetent mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells overexpressing ARID1A or GFP .

(C) Proportion of NSG mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a 

Het or KO cell lines. 

(D) Proportion of syngeneic immunocompetent mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a Het or KO cell lines. 

(E) Proportion of NSG and syngeneic immunocompetent mice that developed metastases following intracardiac injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a KO cells overexpressing GFP or ARID1A .

(F) Proportion of NSG and syngeneic immunocompetent mice that developed metastases following intracardiac injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a Het or KO cell lines. 

(G) Proportion of athymic nude mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R

Arid1a KO cells overexpressing ARID1A or GFP .

(H) Proportion of athymic nude mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R

Arid1a Het or KO cell lines. For (A) through (H) , the proportions were compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(I) CD4 + and CD8 + T-cell depletion in immunocompetent mice treated with anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies. Gated on FVD -CD45 +CD3 + cells. 

(J) Tumor growth curves following flank injection of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids into immunocompetent mice treated with control IgG, anti-CD8 antibody, or combined anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 antibodies. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison versus IgG control through day 28 by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction measuring time × treatment interaction. 

(K) Proportion of mice that developed tumors following flank injection of in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumoroids under the indicated T-cell depletion conditions. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(L-N) Flow cytometric analysis of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids 7 and 14 days after flank injection into syngeneic immunocompetent mice, measuring for infiltrated 

(L) CD45 + cells, 

(M) F4/80 +CD11b +CD206 – macrophages, and 

(N) F4/80 +CD11b +CD206 + macrophages. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared using Welch's t-test at each timepoint. NS, non-significant, * P < 0.05, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9 15 21 27 33 39 45 050 100 150 200 Days After Injection Tumor Volume (mm 3)

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT tumors treated with: Vehicle (N=12) anti-GM-CSF (N=13) 

*G

*

F

020 40 60 80 % CD11c + cells 

*

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

MHC-I +CD86 + cells 01234WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

> % CD45 + cells

D CD11c + Cells P = 0.05 

C

0246Monocytes that migrated (x10 4)

*

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

N: 143 46 

**** 

020 40 60 80 100 Tumoroids in contact with DC (%) 

E

93% 18% 

> Arid1a  WT Arid1a  KO

Dendritic cells Tumoroids 

B

↑ Secreted Cytokines 

↑ RNA-seq ↓ ATAC-seq 1GM-CSF 14114 

231.2 14.0 6.3 7.4 173.9 5.8 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 CCL2 CXCL2 CXCL5 G-CSF GM-CSF 

TNFα 

> 010 20 30 40 50

Differentially expressed: 

> WT KO in-vivo-R  Arid1a

Csf2 

> 00.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 00.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 02460246in-vivo-R  Arid1a

WT KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT/KO Veh diABZI 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 

*CD69 +CD44 +CD62L - Cells 

R

Veh diABZI 01234

*CD44 +CD62L -CD8 + cells 

Q

Veh diABZI 012345

> % CD45 + cells

*CD8 + Cells 

PO

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0500 1000 1500 2000 Days Vehicle (N = 6) diABZI (N = 6) 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumors treated with: 

> Tumor Volume (mm 3)

**** 

> Relative Expression (log 10 )

IFN-γ: – + – +-1 0123– +-2 -1 01234

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

> P = 0.05

* ** 

Cxcl9 Cxcl10 Cxcl11 

-2 -1 012345 P = 0.05 

NM*** 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT KO 

IFN-γ: – –+ +KO WT MHC-I 

02000 4000 6000 Median Fluorescence Intensity 

Ifngr1 

> WT KO
> in-vivo-R Arid1a

J

25 50 75 

−1500 0 1500 Distance to TSS Intensity 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO A

WT KO 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 IFNGR1 Median Fluorescence Intensity 

L*** 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

IFNGR1 WT1 KO1 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

WT2 WT3 KO2 KO3 

β-ACTIN 

100 75 50 37 50 37 

K

0510 15 20 

−10 −5 0 5 10 Fold Change (log 2)Adjusted P v alue (−log 10 )

H

Ifngr1 

WT KO 00.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Relative Expression 

in-vivo-R Arid1a Ifngr1 

*I

Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

Upregulated in 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT Figure 4 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 4. Tumor Arid1a induced GM-CSF secretion and type II interferon response to spur the cancer immunity cycle. 

(A) Assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) analysis showing chromatin accessibility profiles relative to transcription start sites (TSS) in in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(B) Integrated analysis of differential cytokine gene expression, secretion, and chromatin accessibility in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Venn diagram shows cytokines with >5-fold differential secretion, significant differential expression by RNA-seq, and differential accessibility by ATAC-seq. Table shows fold-change in secretion for the top differentially secreted cytokines as a ratio of WT/KO. GM-CSF is the only cytokine with concordant changes across all three modalities. The track for Csf2 (which encodes GM-CSF) is shown. 

(C) Monocyte migration toward conditioned media from in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(D) Flow cytometric quantification of CD11c + dendritic cells in tumor-draining lymph nodes of mice bearing in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(E) Representative images and quantification of dendritic cells in direct contact with in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids during co-culture. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(F) Flow cytometric analysis of dendritic cell activation markers (MHC-I +CD86 +) following co-culture with in-vivo-R Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(G) Tumor growth curves following flank injection of in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumoroids into immunocompetent mice treated with vehicle or anti–GM-CSF antibody. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Curves compared by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction. The black asterisk denotes a significant time × treatment interaction. Individual timepoints were compared with Bonferroni's multiple comparisons test and day 12 was the only timepoint that was significantly different between groups (green asterisk). 

(H) Volcano plot showing differential gene expression between in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids from bulk RNA-seq. 

(I) qPCR analysis of Ifngr1 expression in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(J) ATAC-seq tracks at the Ifngr1 locus in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(K) Western blot for IFNGR1 and β-ACTIN in in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(L) Flow cytometric analysis of cell-surface IFNGR1 expression on in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Left: representative histogram. Right: quantification of median fluorescence intensity. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(M) Flow cytometric analysis of cell-surface MHC-I expression on in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids at baseline and following IFN-γ stimulation. Left: representative histogram. Right: quantification of median fluorescence intensity. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(N) qPCR analysis of select genes following IFN-γ treatment of in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(O) Tumor growth curves following flank injection of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids in mice treated with vehicle or diABZI. Treatment (arrows) was administered at days 21, 28, and 35 after tumoroid injection. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison of vehicle vs diABZI from day 21 through day 38 by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction. Asterisks denote the time × treatment interaction. 

(P-R) Flow cytometric analysis of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumors following intratumoral diABZI treatment, quantifying as a percentage of CD45+ cells with data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch's t-test. 

(P) CD8+ T cells, 

(Q) CD44+CD62L– effector memory CD8+ T cells, and 

(R) CD69+CD44+CD62L– activated effector memory T cells. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

J

Veh diABZI 0510 15 20 

> % CD45 + cells

P = 0.06 CD3 + cells 

I

Veh diABZI 050 100 

> % FVD - cells

NS CD45 + cells 

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 0500 1000 1500 2000 Vehicle (N = 8) diABZI (N = 10) 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO tumors treated with: 

Days Tumor Volume (mm 3)

**** 

G

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 

0500 1000 1500 2000 Days Tumor Volume (mm 3)

H

N: 30 in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

Day 80 Day 0 38% 

F

020 40 60 80 100 Proportion Engrafted (%) Immuno-competent 0 10 20 30 40 50 025 50 75 100 Age (weeks) Probability of Survival WT+anti-PD-L1 (N=28) WT+PBS (N=25) KO+anti-PD-L1 (N=25) KO+PBS (N=24) 

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

E

IgG (N=9) anti-PD-1 (N=9) 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 03500 500 1500 2500 Days Tumor Volume (mm 3)

D

N: in-vivo-R Arid1a KO Proportion Engrafted (%) 020 40 60 80 100 100% 9

C

Immuno-competent 

BMHC-I 020 40 60 80 100 Normalized To Mode 10 010 110 210 310 410 5A10 010 110 210 310 410 5IFNGR1 020 40 60 80 100 Normalized To Mode 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT 

in-vivo-R Arid1a KO Supplemental Figure 4 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 4. Related to Figure 4. 

(A) Representative histogram of flow cytometric analysis of cell-surface IFNGR1 expression on 

in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(B) Representative histogram of flow cytometric analysis of cell-surface MHC-I expression on in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids following IFN-γ stimulation. 

(C) Proportion of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids that engrafted following contralateral flank co-injection with in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumoroids in syngeneic immunocompetent mice. 

(D) Tumor growth curves of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumors injected into the flanks of syngeneic immunocompetent mice and then treated with control IgG or anti–PD-1 antibody. 

(E) Kaplan–Meier estimates of overall survival for in-vivo -R Arid1a WT and KO mice treated with PBS or anti–PD-L1 antibody beginning at 24 weeks of age (arrow). 

(F) Proportion of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids that engrafted following flank injection into immunocompetent mice previously exposed to in-vivo -R Arid1a WT tumoroids. 

(G) Tumor growth curves following flank injection of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumoroids in mice treated with vehicle or diABZI. Treatment (arrows) was administered at days 1, 7, and 14 after tumoroid injection. Data shown as mean ± SEM. Statistical comparison of vehicle versus diABZI through day 45 by mixed-effects model (REML) with Geisser-Greenhouse correction. Asterisks denote the time × treatment interaction. 

(H) Individual tumor growth trajectories after treatment with vehicle or diABZI given at days 21, 28, and 35 after tumoroid injection (arrows indicate treatment days). 

(I-J) Flow cytometric analysis of in-vivo -R Arid1a KO tumors following intratumoral diABZI treatment, with data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch's t-test. 

(I) CD45 + cells as a proportion of FVD – viable cells, and 

(J) CD3 + cells as a proportion of CD45 + cells. NS, non-significant, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Top differentially expressed genes when comparing in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids 

I

> in-vitro-R
> Arid1a

KO KO WT WT 

> in-vivo-R
> Arid1a

WT KO 

> in-vitro-R
> Arid1a

KO KO WT WT 

> in-vivo-R
> Arid1a

WT KO Top differentially expressed genes when comparing in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids 

H

0 20 -1 01234 Cxcl11 

NS 0 20 -1 01234 Cxcl10 

NS 0 20 -1 012345

> 1
> Relative Expression (log 10 )

Cxcl9 

IFN-γ dose (ng) 

in-vitro-R Arid1a KO in-vitro-R Arid1a KO in-vitro-R Arid1a WT in-vitro-R Arid1a WT 

G

NS NS MHC-I 

05000 10000 15000 20000 

in-vitro-R Arid1a 

IFN-γ: – –+ +

> Median Fluorescence Intensity 10 010 110 210 310 410 5

MHC-I 020 40 60 80 100 Normalized To Mode 

KO KO WT WT KO KO WT WT 

F10 010 110 210 310 410 5IFNGR1 020 40 60 80 100 Normalized To Mode 

0500 1000 1500 2000 

> Median Fluorescence Intensity

IFNGR1 NS 

in-vitro -R Arid1a 

KO KO WT WT 

E

100 75 50 37 

50 37 IFNGR1 

β-ACTIN 

in-vitro-R Arid1a 

KO1 KO1 WT1 WT1 KO2 KO2 WT2 WT2 

D    

> 0510 15 20
> −10 −5 0510

Fold Change (log 2)

> Adjusted P value (−log 10 )

Ifngr1 

C Upregulated in 

in-vitro-R Arid1a KO 

Upregulated in 

in-vitro-R Arid1a WT 

020 40 60 80 100 Tumoroids in contact with DC (%) 

in-vitro-R Arid1a 

N: 410 297 NS 

B Dendritic cells Tumoroids 

> Arid1a  WT Arid1a  WT Arid1a  KO Arid1a  KO
> in-vitro-R Arid1a

KO KO WT WT 

A

34.8 1.7 4.6 1.0 1.7 3.7 1.0 1.0 1.0 5.2 1.0 1.0 CCL2 CXCL2 CXCL5 G-CSF GM-CSF 

TNFα 

010 20 30 40 50 

in-vitro-R Arid1a 

KO KO WT WT WT/KO 

Figure 5 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 5. In vitro Arid1a deletion did not affect GM-CSF or type II interferon response. 

(A) Quantification of cytokines in conditioned media from in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(B) Representative images and quantification of dendritic cells in direct contact with in-vitro-R

Arid1a WT or KO tumoroids during co-culture. Proportions compared via Fisher’s exact test. 

(C) Volcano plot showing differential gene expression between in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids from bulk RNA-seq. 

(D) Western blot for IFNGR1 and β-ACTIN in in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. 

(E) Flow cytometric analysis for cell-surface IFNGR1 expression on in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Left: representative histogram. Right: quantification of median fluorescence intensity. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(F) Flow cytometric analysis for cell-surface MHC-I expression on in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids at baseline and following IFN-γ stimulation. Left: representative histogram. Right: quantification of median fluorescence intensity. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(G) qPCR of select genes following IFN-γ treatment of in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(H) Heatmap showing the top differentially expressed genes between in-vivo-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids, plotted across both in-vivo-R Arid1a and in-vitro-R Arid1a tumoroid datasets. 

(I) Heatmap showing the top differentially expressed genes between in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids, plotted across both in-vivo-R Arid1a and in-vitro-R Arid1a tumoroid datasets. NS, non-significant.  

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint 012345Relative Expression
> Ifngr1 in-vitro-RArid1a
> KO KO WT WT NS

ASupplemental Figure 5 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 5. Related to Figure 5. 

(A) qPCR analysis of Ifngr1 expression in in-vitro-R Arid1a WT and KO tumoroids. Data shown as individual data points with mean ± SEM compared with Welch’s t-test. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint T cells Cytotoxic cells CD8+ T cells 02468Cell Type Score 

*** *E

ARID1A WT (N = 44) ARID1A Mutant (N = 6) 

> IDO1 CXCL9 CXCL10 HLA-DRA

0510 15 Log 2(RSEM+1) 

D** **** C

-1 01234Z score 

ARID1A WT (N=44) 

ARID1A Mutant (N=6) -1 01234

> Z score

WT Mutant 

ARID1A Status 

**** B    

> ALLOGRAFT REJECTION INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE IL6 JAK STAT3 SIGNALING 0510 15
> −2 −1 012

Normalized Enrichment Score 

AGS 

> Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

Upregulated in 

ARID1A WT 

Upregulated in 

ARID1A mutants 

-1 01234Z score 

ARID1A WT (N=207) 

ARID1A Mutant (N=16) 

H

WT Mutant -1 01234

ARID1A Status Z score 

G

NS     

> IL2 STAT5 SIGNALING INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE IL6 JAK STAT3 SIGNALING TNFA SIGNALING VIA NFKB INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE ALLOGRAFT REJECTION
> 0369
> −2 −1 012

Normalized Enrichment Score Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

CIN F Upregulated in 

ARID1A WT 

Upregulated in 

ARID1A mutants Figure 6 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 6. Effects of ARID1A loss-of-function mutations in human gastric cancer were dependent on molecular subtype. 

(A) Human gastric adenocarcinoma samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas were analyzed via gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) comparing genomically stable (GS) tumors that carried 

ARID1A loss-of-function (LOF) mutations (N = 6) to ARID1A wild-type (WT) samples (N = 44). Select immune-related pathways are labeled. 

(B) 6-gene interferon-γ signature z-score comparison of GS ARID1A WT and mutant tumors. Data shown as a box-and-whisker plot (box, interquartile range; center line, median; whiskers, minimum to maximum) and compared with Welch's t-test. 

(C) Waterfall plot of IFN-γ z-scores for all 50 GS tumors, ranked by score. ARID1A WT samples in gray; ARID1A mutant samples in green. 

(D) Expression of IFN-γ pathway genes in GS ARID1A WT and mutant tumors. Log-transformed data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(E) Immune cell type signature scores in GS ARID1A WT and mutant tumors. Data shown as mean ± SEM and compared with Welch’s t-test. 

(F) GSEA comparing chromosomal instability (CIN) tumors that carried ARID1A LOF mutations (N = 16) to ARID1A wild-type (WT) tumors (N = 207). Select immune-related pathways are labeled. 

(G) 6-gene interferon-γ signature z-score comparison of CIN ARID1A WT and mutant tumors. Data shown as a box-and-whisker plot (box, interquartile range; center line, median; whiskers, minimum to maximum) and compared with Welch's t-test. 

(H) Waterfall plot of IFN-γ z-scores for all 223 CIN tumors, ranked by score. ARID1A WT samples in gray; ARID1A mutant samples in purple. NS, non-significant, * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint

WT Het KO 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Proportion Predicted Subtype EBV MSI CIN GS 

A

in-vivo-R Arid1a 

11 N: 11 7

ALLOGRAFT REJECTION INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE KRAS SIGNALING DN IL6 JAK STAT3 SIGNALING PROTEIN SECRETION 

0510 15 

−2 −1 0 1 2Normalized Enrichment Score Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

GS B

PROTEIN SECRETION CHOLESTEROL HOMEOSTASIS MTORC1 SIGNALING ESTROGEN RESPONSE LATE GLYCOLYSIS FATTY ACID METABOLISM PEROXISOME ESTROGEN RESPONSE EARLY HYPOXIA MITOTIC SPINDLE HEME METABOLISM APICAL JUNCTION P53 PATHWAY ANDROGEN RESPONSE XENOBIOTIC METABOLISM IL2 STAT5 SIGNALING INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE IL6 JAK STAT3 SIGNALING TNFA SIGNALING VIA NFKB INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE ALLOGRAFT REJECTION 

0369

−2 −1 0 1 2Normalized Enrichment Score Adjusted P value (-log 10 )

CCIN Supplemental Figure 6 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.08.18.745460 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplemental Figure 6. Related to Figure 6. (A) Mean proportion of predicted TCGA molecular subtype in gastric cancers from in-vivo-R

Arid1a WT, Het, and KO mice. Data shown as mean ± SEM. (B-C ) Gene set enrichment analysis comparing 

(B) genomically stable (GS) tumors that carried ARID1A LOF mutations to ARID1A WT samples and 

(C) chromosomal instability (CIN) tumors that carried ARID1A loss-of-function (LOF) mutations to ARID1A wild-type (WT) tumors. All significantly enriched and depleted pathways labeled.