Title: 70714420

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
1

# MicroRNA spatial profiling for assessing drug efficacy in 

# BRCA1 -related triple -negative breast tumors 

Omar N. Mohd ¶,1 , Lin Wang ¶,3 , Brian R. Sardella 2, David Jou 2, Gerburg M. Wulf 3, Frank J. 

Slack 2,4 , Yujing J. Heng *,2,4 and Patrick S. Doyle *,4,5 .

Keywords: Spatial microRNA profiling , multiplexed nucleic acid detection , hydrogel 

sensors, tumor microenvironment , Breast Cancer, PARP inhibit ion , LDA, SSIM 

> ¶

Co -first authors 

> *

Co -corresponding authors 

E-mail:  yheng@bidmc.harvard.edu 

E-mail:  pdoyle@mit.edu  

> 1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States  

> 2

Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 

02215, United States  

> 3

Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 

02215, United States  

> 4

Harvard Medical School Initiative for RNA Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 

Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States  

> 5

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 

Massachusetts 02139, United States 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

# Abstract 

BRCA1/2 -mutated breast cancers exhibit homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) and 

are initially sensitive to poly(ADP -ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, but 40 -70% of 

patients develop resistance, creating a need for predictive biomarkers that capture treatment -

associated spatial heterogeneity. Using the K14 -Cre Brca1 f/f Trp53 f/f model with tumors that 

acquired PARP inhibitor resistance, we evaluated PARP inhibitor combinations with either 

PI3K inhibition or Poly(I:C) in vivo . To determine how treatment altered tumor spatial 

microRNA (miRNA) profiles, we applied our hydrogel -based, nanoliter well array in situ 

miRNA assay to quantify and spatially profile miRNAs on FFPE sections from tumors treated 

for 10 days and developed spatial miRNA analysis frameworks integrating latent Dirichlet 

allocation (LDA) and principal component analysis (PCA). We also incorporate d immune 

architecture using Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) maps to assess co -localization 

of immune infiltration and miRNA topics. Both combinations improved antitumor activity 

compared to PARP inhibition alone. The resulting spatial miRNA topi cs stratified early 

tumors according to subsequent PARP inhibitor sensitivity or resistance and distinguished 

their treatment regimens, while SSIM analysis revealed co -localization of immune infiltration 

and miRNA topics. This integrative spatial miRNA ass ay and analysis identified a let -7a -

dominant topic associated with PARP inhibitor resistance, indicating that spatial miRNA 

profiling may inform therapeutic stratification in BRCA1/2 -related breast cancers. 

# Introduction 

Breast tumors with a germline BRCA1/2 mutation have a defective homologous 

recombination DNA double -strand break repair pathway. [1] Poly(ADP -ribose) polymerase 

(PARP) inhibitors are FDA -approved to treat advanced BRCA1/2 -related breast cancers. [2] 

PARP inhibitors work by stalling and collapsing replication forks thereby stopping DNA 

repair and eventual cell death. [3,4] Nevertheless, about 40% to 70% of patients fail to respond 

or will develop resistance to PARP inhibitors over time. [5 –7] The high rate of resistance has 

driven efforts to develop combination therapies that enhance the effectiveness of PARP 

inhibitors, as well as to identify biomarkers to predict which patients are most likely to 

benefit. 

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (~20 nucleotides), non -coding RNAs that have 

emerged as useful biomarkers for the detection of early cancers, including breast cancer. [8 –

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

12] As such , miRNAs may provide informative molecular readouts of PARP inhibitor 

response and resistance in breast tumors. However, miRNA measurements are often 

performed in bulk tissue, which obscures intratumoral heterogeneity and removes spatial 

information .[13] We previously showed that integrated analysis of expression and spatial 

localization of seven miRNAs in endpoint murine breast tumors following a full treatment 

course discriminated PARP inhibitor -sensitive from -resistant tumors .[14] These findings 

suggest that spatially resolved miRNA measurements can capture treatment -associated tumor 

states that are not readily accessible from bulk assays. 

One strategy to overcome PARP inhibitor resistance involves co -targeting PARP and 

the PI3 -kinase (PI3K) pathway. PI3K inhibitors can suppress the growth of tumors with 

PIK3CA mutations, [15] and are also effective in tumors with wild -type PIK3CA .[16] In 

addition to their role in tumor proliferation, PI3K enzymes contribute to the DNA damage 

response: PIK3CB is required for double -strand break sensing by regulating NBN recruitment 

to damaged DNA. [17] Building on this mechanistic rationale, we and others have 

demonstrated that combining a PARP inhibitor with a PI3K inhibitor produces significant 

preclinical and clinical activity in BRCA1/2 -related cancers. [18 –21] We have also previously 

published that the effectiveness of PARP inhibition depends on the tumor immune 

microenvironment (TME). [22 –24] Olaparib increased infiltration and activation of CD8 + T-

cells [23] and tumor -associated macrophages. [22] Therefore, another potential combination 

therapy could be combining PARP with an immune stimulant such as 

polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly(I:C)). Poly(I:C) activat es dendritic cells by binding to 

various surface receptors such as toll -like receptor 3 which in turn activates CD8 + T-cells. [25] 

These mechanistically distinct treatment conditions provide a biologically relevant setting in 

which to evaluate spatial molecular readouts of treatment response and resistance. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

In this work , we used our previously described hydrogel -based, nanoliter well array in 

situ miRNA technology [14,26] to assess tumor spatial miRNA profiles in FFPE sections after 

10 days of treatment . To interpret this high -dimensional spatial readout, we developed an 

analytical framework integrating latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) and principal component 

analysis (PCA) to identify early, spatially resolved miRNA profiles associated with treatment 

resp onse. We further developed a specialized, priming -based LDA analysis to improve 

differentiation between treatment regimens among PARP inhibitor -sensitive tumors. Finally, 

we evaluated whether incorporating intratumoral immune composition, by computing 

Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [27] maps between immune cell infiltration and 

miRNA topics, could enhance interpretation of the LDA -derived spatial topics by relating 

them to underlying cellular architecture and highlighting regions where immune patterns and 

miRNA distributions co -localize. This integrative spatial miRNA assay and analysis provides 

a framework for linking treatment -associated miRNA patterns to tumor and immune 

architecture and may inform prognostic or predictive biomarker development in BRCA1/2 -

related breast cancers. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

# Results 

Combination therapies produced promising therapeutic effects in PARP inhibitor -resistant 

tumors 

We used the K14 -Cre Brca1 f/f Trp53 f/f mouse tumor model to investigate the effects of 

combining a PARP inhibitor, olaparib, with either a PI3K inhibitor (i.e., alpelisib) or 

Poly(I:C) ( Fig 1A ). This BRCA1 -related triple -negative breast cancer (TNBC) model is 

known to be sensitive to PARP inhibition [28] , as well as in combination with alpelisib. [18] 

Our current results using orthotopic xenotransplanted tumor fragments from this model were 

consistent with prior findings: olaparib significantly lengthened the median time taken to 

reach study endpoint of 20 mm compared to control (75 -78 days versus 19 -23 days, p<0.001; 

Fig 1B.i ). Combination therapies further lengthened the time to reach 20 mm when compared 

to olaparib alone (olaparib+alpelisib 115 days versus 75 days, p<0.001, Fig 1B.i ;

olaparib+Poly(I:C) 120 days versus 78 days, p<0.001, Fig 1B.ii and S1 Fig ). This study 

demonstrated for the first time that Poly(I:C) enhanced PARP inhibition, with an effect size 

similar to alpelisib in olaparib -sensitive tumors. 

We derived olaparib -resistant tumors from initially sensitive tumors grown 

orthotopically under constant olaparib treatment. [29] Median survival was shorter in mice 

with resistant tumors compared to those with sensitive tumors (resistant 23 -24 days versus 

sensitive 75 -58 days ; Fig 1B ). Olaparib+alpelisib but not olaparib+Poly(I:C) improved the 

outcome in resistant tumors when compared to olaparib alone (olaparib+alpelisib 39 days 

versus 23 days, p=0.018, Fig 1B.iii ; olaparib+Poly(I:C) 30 days versus 24 days, p=0.567, Fig 

1B.iv and S1 Fig ). This means that alpelisib but not Poly(I:C) was able to at least partially 

overcome PARP -inhibitor resistance. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Fig 1. Evaluating combination therapies in a murine BRCA1 -related TNBC model. (A.) 

The schematic illustrates the in vivo study design. Syngeneic olaparib -sensitive or -resistant 

tumors were implanted into FVB/NJ mice and treated with olaparib alone or in combination 

with alpelisib or Poly(I:C) once tumors reached a diameter of 5 mm. (B.) Kaplan -Meier 

curves illustrate time taken for tumors to reach study endpoint of 20 mm. i. Olaparib -sensitive 

tumors were treated with olaparib, alpelisib , or the combination of both. ii. Olaparib -sensitive 

tumors were treated with olaparib or a combination of olaparib and Poly(I:C). Similarly, 

olaparib -resistant tumors were treated with olaparib alone or in combination with iii. alpelisib 

or iv. Poly(I:C). * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

Spatial miRNA analysis 

Given that the combination therapies improved treatment outcomes, we investigated the 

extent to which different treatments altered the spatial miRNA profiles of the tumors. We 

performed our previously described hydrogel -based, nanoliter -well in situ miRNA assay 

[14,26,30 –32] on tumors ( n=21) harvested 10 days after treatment when the TME remodeling 

and transcriptional reprogramming are likely to be complete but not yet confounded by 

extensive necrosis ( Fig 2A ). 

Our in situ miRNA assay simultaneously quantified seven miRNAs commonly studied 

in breast cancer ( Fig 2B, S2 Fig ). [33 –37] MiR -21 -5p, let -7a -5p, and miR -19a -3p were highly 

abundant in these K14 -Cre Brca1 f/f Trp53 f/f tumors ( S3 Fig ). Cursory univariate analyses 

determined that both sensitive and resistant tumors treated with olaparib+Poly(I:C) had lower 

let -7a expression compared to olaparib alone (both adj. p=0.01; S3 Fig ). The expression of the 

other six miRNAs did not differ between treatment groups or sensitive/resistant tumors in this 

bulk analysis ( S3 Fig ). 

Since analysis of individual miRNA expression levels was insufficient to inform 

tumor phenotype or capture tumor -level miRNA organization, we hypothesized that a 

spatially informed assessment of the tumors may reveal underlying trends, as evidenced by 

our prior work. [14] We applied a “naïve” implementation of an LDA -based framework, 

whereby we trained an LDA model on all the 10 -day treated tumors (over 115,248 data 

points), where each point correspond ed to a miRNA amount per unit of space in a tumor 

section. Th is case -study -wide LDA model learn ed underlying features in the form of “topics ”

that were themselves composed of miRNA probabilities, which could be visualized as word 

cloud s (Fig 2D .i ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Fig 2. Spatial miRNA analysis overview. (A.) Schematic of the miRNA assay used to obtain 

spatially -resolved miRNA data. (B.) Characteristic 7 -plex spatial miRNA output. (C.) Case -

study -wide LDA pipeline for assessing treatment resistance. (D.) i. LDA topic results from 

the case -study -wide LDA model in the form of a word cloud where the font size of each 

miRNA corresponds to its relative weighting for that topic and the orange font signifies a 

relatively greater weight within a topic as well. ii. The spatial assignment of the LDA topics 

to a tumor sample; the color of each well corresponds to the color of the topic borders in i. iii. 

The percentage of each tissue assigned to each topic. The first letter on the left corresponds to 

whether a tumor was known a priori to be olaparib -resistant (R) or -sensitive (S), followed by 

treatment group: olaparib -only (O), olaparib+alpelisib (OA), or olaparib+Poly(I:C) (OP); the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

color of the bars corresponds to the topic border colors. iv. PCA of all the tumor samples’ 

topic percentages. The samples in green correspond to tumors that were known to be sensitive 

to treatment, while the red denote resistant samples; the black colored text corresponds to 

control tumor samples. Topic 2 positivel y contributed towards PC1, while topic 1 contributed 

negatively. 

The power of the LDA topics is in the method of application ; the associated word 

probabilities can be leveraged as weights that can be applied sequentially to each spatial unit 

on any given sample (explained in S4 Fig ) such that each pixel is effectively associated with 

the topic that corresponds to the highest weighted value. This can be visualized 

colorimetrically by associating topics with colors that can be assigned spatially, allowing for 

further examination ( Fig 2D .ii, S4 Fig ). A more holistic analysis can be applied by 

summarizing the associated topic percentages within all tumor sections ( Fig 2D .iii ) which not 

only allows easier viewing of topic trends across all samples but can also be used to stratify 

the data via PCA ( Fig 2D .i v). The resultant PCA showed that the tumors mostly stratified 

along the first principal component (PC1, 96% variance explained ; Fig 2D.iv ). Olaparib -

sensitive tumors occupied the positive PC1 region, with significantly higher PC1 scores than 

resistant tumors ( median PC1 0.42 vs -0.083; Mann -Whitney U test, p <0.001 ; Fig 2D.iv ). 

Topic 2 , dominated by miR -21, was found to contribute positively to PC1, while 

Topic 1 , dominated by let -7a, contributed negatively (Fig 2D.iv ). This means that miR -21 was 

associated with olaparib sensitivity while let -7a was associated with resistance. Notably, the 

tumor -specific survival trends in Fig 1 were foreshadowed by spatial miRNA patterns 

observed in day 10 tumors (Fig 2D.ii , S5 Fig ).

Within olaparib -resistant tumors, the case -study -wide LDA model stratified tumors 

that received olaparib alone and those receiving combination therapies ( Fig 2D .iv ). 

Combination treatments altered the miRNA profiles of resistant tumors, shifting them toward 

the profiles of sensitive tumors , specifically by increasing the proportion of the miR -21 -

dominated topic within the tumors (Fig 2D .iii ). Within the olaparib -sensitive tumors, there 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

was little stratification between olaparib -only and combination treatment regimens (Fig 

2D.iv ), despite the survival study demonstrating an approximately two -fold increase in 

survival with combination therapies compared with olaparib alone (Fig 1B ). Together, these 

data indicate that the miRNA profiles distinguishing olaparib -sensitive from -resistant tumors 

reflect underlying functionally ‘sensitive’ and ‘resistant’ cell state rather than a simple 

pharmacodynamic response to treatment. 

Refined spatial miRNA analysis of PARP inhibitor -sensitive tumors 

Since t he case -study -wide spatial LDA analysis ( Fig 2C ) did not provide pharmacodynamic 

information specific for mono - or combination therapy in olaparib -sensitive tumors as shown 

in Fig 1B , we performed a specialized analysis to improve the stratification of olaparib -

sensitive tumors and investigate whether early spatial miRNA profiles could differentiate 

tumors that received combination therapy versus olaparib -only treatment (Fig 3A ). 

Specifically, we examined whether this early stratification could reflect the greater efficacy of 

the combination regimens observed in Fig 1 .

The core of this specialized analysis lies in isolating the sensitive tumor samples and 

examining how their LDA -derived miRNA probabilities differ from those learned from all the 

tumors. First, we trained an independent LDA model using only olaparib -sensitive tumors to 

obtain miRNA probabilities ( S2 Table ), which were subsequently used to prime the spatial 

miRNA input for olaparib -sensitive tumors ( Fig 3A ). The highest miRNA probabilities from 

the learned topics ( S2 Table ) were used mathematically as weights that were reapplied to the 

raw miRNA input values, thus biasing the spatial miRNA data with respect to the learned 

miRNA probabilities ( Fig 3A ). The primed data was input into the original case -study -wide 

LDA model ( Fig 2C ), and similar downstream visualization techniques and PCA were 

performed. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Fig 3. Treatment -sensitive tumor analysis. (A.) Schematic of the specialized miRNA 

analysis of the sensitive -only tumors. i. First , the miRNA data of olaparib -sensitive tumors are 

selected. ii. The miRNA data is then used to train an independent LDA model. iii. The highest 

miRNA probabilities from that model were extracted. iv. The extracted miRNA probabilities 

were then used as weights and are multiplied to the input miRNA data, thus “priming” the 

data. v. The case -study -wide LDA model from Fig 2C was applied to the primed miRNA 

data. vi. Downstream analysis was performed to stratify the olaparib -sensitive tumors. (B.) i. 

The spatial assignment of the case -study -wide LDA topics to the sensitive tumor samples 

after being primed by the specialized LDA model miRNA probabilities. The assigned topics 

were as in Fig 2D , where the blue corresponds to the let -7a -dominated topic (topic 1) and 

orange corresponds to the miR -21 -dominated topic (topic 2). ii. The percentage of each tissue 

assigned to each topic. iii. PCA of the sensitive tumor samples’ topic percentages. The 

samples in green correspond to the tumors that received the combination therapies, while the 

red denote olaparib -only treated samples. Topic 1 was found to contribute positively to PC1, 

while topic 2 contributed negatively. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

The specialized analysis stratified olaparib -sensitive tumors almost exclusively along 

PC1, with the let -7a -dominated topic 1 now having a greater allocation in tumors treated with 

olaparib alone, and the miR -21 -dominated topic 2 having a greater allocation in tumors that 

received the combination therapies ( Fig 3B ). This pattern aligns with the improved survival 

among sensitive tumors receiving combination therapy ( Fig 1B ) and mirrors the trend seen in 

olaparib -resistant tumors in which combination treatment similarly shifted the spatial miRNA 

profile toward the miR -21 -dominant topic ( Fig 2D.iii ). 

While successful, this stratification still relied on our a priori knowledge that the 

tumors were sensitive and cannot be accurately described as fully prognostic, even though the 

final topic assignments were allocated by applying the same case -study -wide LDA model as 

in the naïve analysis to the newly primed miRNA data. What can be gleaned from this 

specialized analysis, however, is what it reveals about the nature of the spatial miRNA 

expression that was impacted by the priming and contributed to the successful stratification of 

the samples by treatment type. In other w ords, the value of this analysis is not so much that it 

provides a standalone prognostic classifier as that it reveals which spatial miRNA patterns 

distinguished olaparib -only from combination therapy within sensitive tumors. 

Given that LDA models produce a set of miRNA probabilities that are referred to as 

“topics,” examining the change between the miRNA probabilities that constitute these topics 

across both the case -study -wide and the sensitive -only analyses can help explain the change in 

topic allocation. The highest -probability miRNAs across both LDA models are let -7a and 

miR -21 ( S2 Table ), which also correspond to the miRNAs that dominate the main topics 

responsible for stratifying the tumors. Our priming technique utilizes these probabilities as 

weights applied to the inputs, which results in what effectively amounts to a contrasting eff ect 

that is applied spatially across the miRNA data. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

In the specialized LDA model, the weights for let -7a and miR -21 are 0.92 and 0.88, 

respectively ( S2 Table ), while the remaining miRNAs have lower weights. It is those 

miRNAs with the highest weights that are impacted relatively less than the rest when the LDA 

model seeks to allocate topics using this newly primed data, such that topics dominated by the 

reduce d miRNAs will have relatively lower values than the topics dominated by heavily 

weighted miRNAs and can be overtaken by new topic allocations. With respect to our two 

dominant topics, we notice that, specifically in the olaparib -only treated samples, some of the 

formerly allocated topic 2 tumor regions, which were miR -21 -dominated, are now being 

assigned to topic 1, which was let -7a -dominated, as can be seen in the spatial annotation maps 

in Fig 3B and S6 Fig . Given that the learned let -7a weighting was only ~4% greater than that 

of miR -21, this means that, for the olaparib -only treated samples, the base amounts of miR -21 

and let -7a across the parts of the tumor region that switched topics were already close i n

value, as opposed to those regions that maintained their original topic assignment. Thus, the 

ability to stratify the samples by treatment type was dependent primarily on examining the 

tumor regions where the miR -21 and let -7a amounts were most similar, which are the same 

regions that change d topic under priming. 

Spatial associations between miRNAs and tumor cellular composition 

Although spatial miRNA profiling stratified tumors by olaparib sensitivity and improved our 

understanding of how relative miRNA abundance related to treatment type, limitations in the 

current analytical approach remain . The spatial information gleaned from the miRNA data 

and represented by spatially allocated miRNA -informed topics ( Fig 2D.ii ) was effectively 

reduced to a summary statistic and further processed via PCA in order to answer a higher -

level question : to what extent was a tumor likely to be sensitive or resistant to treatment. By

stratifying the tumor samples along a PCA with known miRNA topic contributions ( Fig 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

2D .iv ), we developed a miRNA classifier that distinguish ed between sensitive and resistant 

state s. To further characterize these states , we considered that the effectiveness of olaparib 

depends on the TME [22 –24] and that Poly(I:C) is an immune stimulant [25] . We therefore 

related miRNA expression patterns to the immune composition of the TME. 

We performed an automated H&E image analysis to classify cells as tumor or stromal. 

We then quantified tumor -infiltrating immune cells by stain ing for CD45 on the next serial 

tumor section cut immediately after the section used for in situ miRNA analysis. We extended 

our case -study -wide LDA analysis pipeline to include an SSIM assessment (Fig 4A )[27] . We 

used t he top two miRNA topic s dominated by let -7a and miR -21 and the normalized ratio of 

the spatial distributions of immune cells to tumor cells as input to generate SSIM maps, 

whereby the structural similarity of each spatial unit within the tumor is assessed by 

examining its local neighborhood and then calculating the local SSIM between the miRNA 

topics and cell ratio maps for that neighborhood ( Fig 4A ). 

To simplify the multiple per -miRNA -topic SSIM maps into a more interpretable form, we 

trained a 3 -topic LDA model whereby each topic is informed by the miRNA -cell SSIM data. 

In this model, topic 1 is dominated by the let -7a -immune SSIM, and topic 2 is dominated by 

the miR -21 -immune SSIM ( Fig 4B.i ). This allow ed us to determine whether the immune cell 

infiltration in any given part of the tissue was more similar to the spatial distribution of one 

miRNA topic as opposed to the other. The 3-topic LDA model was applied to the tumor SSIM 

maps and the tumors’ topic percentages were calculated ( Fig 4B.ii ). A new variation of the 

spatial topic map was developed, where we added an intensity scaling to the topic maps to 

indicate not only which miRNA spatial distributions were more similar to the immune cell 

infiltration, but also the strength of that similarity via incorporating the per -pixel SSIM scores 

into the topic map ( Fig 4B.iii, iv ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

Fig 4. Spatial LDA -SSIM analysis. (A.) Schematic of the spatial LDA -SSIM analysis 

pipeline. i. The pre -processed inputs of the analysis pipeline consist of the spatial miRNA 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16 

data and spatial immune cell counts derived from CD45 immunostaining ii. Both the cells and 

spatial miRNA data were processed prior to input into the SSIM. The miRNAs were 

processed through the case -study -wide LDA analysis pipeline, and only the top 2 dominant 

spatial topics were input into SSIM ( Fig 2D.ii ). Cell counts were processed by calculating the 

ratio of immune cells to tumor cells, with appropriate normalization applied, to represent 

spatial immune cell infiltration within each tumor. iii. The resulting heatmap representation of 

the SSIM maps showing the structural similarity between the immune cell infiltration and 

spatial miRNA topic assignments (B.) i. LDA topic results from training an LDA model on 

the miRNA topic -immune infiltration SSIM maps ii. The percentage of each tissue assigned 

to each SSIM topic. iii. The spatial assignment of the SSIM LDA topics to the sensitive 

samples iv. The spatial assignment of the SSIM LDA topics to the resistant samples; the color 

of each well corresponds to the color of the SSIM LDA topic borders in i. while the intensity 

of the color corresponds to the intensity of the dominant SSIM maps that inform the topic. 

Most tumors, regardless of whether they were olaparib -sensitive or -resistant, had a 

greater spatial similarity between the immune cell infiltration and the let -7a miRNA topic 

than that of miR -21 ( Fig 4B.ii ). The exception to this observation was found among sensitive 

tumors that received the combination olaparib+Poly(I:C) treatment, where immune cell 

infiltration was more spatially similar to the miR -21 -dominated topic. Given that Poly(I:C) 

modulates the immune response in tumors [38] , increased immune cell activity was expected 

in tumors receiving olaparib+Poly(I:C). Further examination of the topic maps revealed a 

notable pattern in olaparib -sensitive tumors treated with the olaparib + Poly(I:C) combination: 

miR -21 -immune regions appeared non -uniform, with brighter (higher -similarity) signal 

concentrated near boundari es with let -7a -immune regions and dimmer signal toward the 

center (e.g. SOP3 in Fig 4B.iii ). Thus, incorporating SSIM into the LDA miRNA analysis 

pipeline enabled the assessment of spatial similarity between miRNAs and the underlying 

biology. Given the complexity of the spatial analysis, these maps also highlight specific 

regions that warrant examination in the future .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

# Discussion 

This study investigated therapeutic strategies combining PARP inhibitors with PI3K 

inhibitors or the immune -stimulant Poly(I:C) to overcome drug resistance in BRCA1 -related 

breast cancers. Both combinations delayed tumor progression, especially in olaparib -sensitive 

tumors, but that benefit was modest in tumors that had acquired resistance. To evaluate these 

treatments, we applied our spatial miRNA in situ profiling technology to FFPE t umors 

collected after 10 days of therapy and developed novel computational frameworks to analyze 

those early -stage tumors. Our LDA -based analyses demonstrated that early, spatially resolved 

miRNA profiles distinguished olaparib -sensitive from -resistant tumors, and revealed how 

combination therapies reshaped resistant tumors toward a functionally sensitive state. Two 

spatial miRNA topics, dominated by miR -21 and let -7a, stratified the tumors as olaparib -

sensitive or -resistant. By integrating SSIM into the analysis pipeline , we bridged the gap 

between high -dimensional molecular signatures and the physical tumor cellular composition, 

enabling interpretation of the spatial biology and immune -regulatory landscapes underlying 

drug response. Our miRNA -based spatial analysis shows potential as a useful tool for 

predicting therapy response and biomarker discovery , and may provide a clinical window to 

adjust therapeutic strategies before tumor progression occurs. 

While both PI3K inhibition and Poly(I:C) enhanced olaparib efficacy in sensitive 

tumors in vivo , only PI3K inhibition at least partially reversed acquired PARP inhibitor 

resistance. Our SSIM analysis of tumors after 10 days of treatment showed that, in resistant 

tumors, there was little difference in the spatial similarity between immune infiltration and the 

let‑7a miRNA topic when comparing olaparib+Poly (I:C) with olaparib alone, indicating a 

failure of Poly(I:C) in modulating the gross composition of the TME. Direct inhibition of the 

PI3K/AKT pathway overcame cell -intrinsic survival mechanisms in resistant tumors. These 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

findings highlight that spatial miRNA profiling can potentially identify tumors that are 

sensitive to PARP inhibitors and may benefit from additional immunomodulatory therapies, 

whereas tumors likely resistant to PARP inhibitors may benefit from the additi on of other 

targeted agents, such as PI3K inhibitors. 

We developed a case -study -wide LDA analysis framework that distinguished olaparib -

sensitive and -resistant tumors. Among resistant tumors, our initial analysis was able to 

further distinguish olaparib -only treated tumors and those that had received the combination 

therapies. The lack of treatment -group separation among olaparib -sensitive tumors prompted 

us to implement a priming -based, specialized analysis to successfully resolve therapy -

associated spatial miRNA profiles. This specialized approach highlighted how targeted 

prim ing of spatial miRNA data can reveal subtle stratification patterns that were missed by 

the case -study -wide LDA analysis. 

To understand how priming influenced topic composition, we compared the miRNA 

probability distributions between the case -study -wide LDA topics and the sensitive -only 

models . T reatment -specific differences within olaparib -sensitive tumors were encoded in 

relatively subtle, locally balanced patterns between miR -21 and let -7a, rather than in large 

global shifts. In both models, the highest -probability miRNAs were let -7a and miR -21 ( S2 

Table ), which was consistent with their dominance in the main topics responsible for 

stratifying the tumors. In the sensitive -only LDA model, the weights for let -7a and miR -21 

were 0.92 and 0.88, respectively, while the other miRNAs had lower weights. As a resu lt, 

those lower -weight miRNAs were reduced more strongly when priming was applied, and 

topics dominated by the reduced miRNAs lost relative influence during topic assignment 

compared to topics dominated by the two heavily weighted miRNAs. In olaparib -only treated 

samples, some of the formerly allocated topic 2 tumor regions (miR -21 -dominated) were re -

assigned to topic 1 (let -7a -dominated) ( Fig 3B.i vs S5 Fig and S6 Fig ). Given that the learned 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

let -7a weighting was only ~4% greater than that of miR -21, this indicated that, in the regions 

that switched topics, the base amounts of miR -21 and let -7a were already close in value, as 

opposed to regions that maintained their original topic assignment. T his explained why 

priming was able to expose treatment -associated separation within the sensitive tumors even 

when global shifts appeared modest. 

Finally, by integrating SSIM with miRNA topic maps and immune cell infiltration, we 

not only established a proof -of -concept framework for relating miRNA -defined spatial 

patterns to cellular architecture, but also found that, whereas most tumors showed grea ter 

spatial similarity between immune infiltration and the let -7a -dominated topic, 

olaparib+Poly (I:C) -treated sensitive tumors instead showed stronger immune -miR -21 spatial 

similarity. The SSIM -LDA maps showed that immune localization was differentially aligned 

with distinct miRNA patterns across treatment groups and highlighted specific micro region s

where those patterns intersect, providing targets for more detailed pathological and 

mechanistic follow -up in the future. 

The study design should also be considered when interpreting these findings. We 

focused on a single BRCA1 -related TNBC mouse model and profiled tumors after 10 days of 

treatment to capture early spatial miRNA differences before endpoint -associated tissue 

changes became dominant. Additional treatment stages and BRCA1/2 -related tumor models 

would help test whet her the same spatial topics persist beyond this setting. The let -7a - and 

miR -21 -dominated topics were associated with olaparib resistance and sensitivity, 

respectively, but these associations do not by themselves explain the biology underlying those 

spatial patterns. Future studies incorporating additional spatial biomarkers and histological 

analysis of the miRNA -defined regions could help clarify the cellular and molecular features 

associated with these topics. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Looking forward, these results suggest that spatial miRNA profiling could potentially 

be leveraged to assess whether a tumor is likely to be responsive to PARP inhibition. 

Applying our analytical framework to larger preclinical studies and, ultimately, to clinical 

BRCA1/2 -mutant breast cancer cohorts would enable the evaluation of the robustness and 

generalizability of our identified spatial miRNA topics and stratifications, and could facilitate 

their translation from prognostic separations into formal predictive classification models. In 

parallel, SSIM -based spatial correlations could be extended beyond miRNA -only data to 

incorporate additional spatially resolved modalities, suc h as IHC markers and mRNA, and to 

explore alternative topic models or more complex spatial similarity measures within the same 

analytical framework, further enriching the biological and translational insight that can be 

extracted. In the context of PARP in hibitor -based therapy, integrating spatial miRNA readouts 

with survival outcomes and immune measurements may ultimately help refine patient 

selection and guide combination therapy choice. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

# Methods 

Animal experiments and analysis 

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the 

Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 

(protocol number 052 -2020 -23). Breast tumors generated in K14 -Cre Brca1 f/f Trp53 f/f female 

mice were dissected into small fragments and transplanted into the mammary fat pad of 

female FVB/NJ recipient mice aged ≥6 weeks. Olaparib -resistant tumors were obtained from 

mice that initially bore olaparib -sensitive tumors and were treated continuously with olaparib 

until resistance was acquired. [29] For treatment efficacy studies, mice were randomized into 

treatment groups once tumors reached ~5 mm in diameter. Treatments continued until tumors 

reached 20 mm in their longest dimension, which was defined as the experimental endpoint; 

mice were euthani zed at this point. For the 10 -day studies, tumors were randomized into 

treatment groups once they reached 8 mm in size. After 10 days of treatment, tumors were 

harvested, fixed in formalin, and processed into FFPE sections. A vehicle -only control group 

was included for the 10 -day olaparib -sensitive tumor cohort. A matched 10 -day vehicle -only 

resistant tumor cohort was not included because, when untreated, olaparib -sensitive and 

olaparib -resistant tumors followed a similar end point trajectory, with tumors reaching 

endpoint within approximately 14 -17 days. 

Olaparib was reconstituted in DMSO, diluted in PBS immediately prior to 

intraperitoneal injection, and administered daily at 50 mg/kg. Alpelisib was administered 

orally at 24 mg/kg daily. Poly(I:C) was delivered intratumorally at 1 mg/kg, three times per 

week. Tumor dimensions were measured every 2 -3 days using electronic calipers, and tumor 

volumes were calculated using the ellipsoid formula: Vol ume=L×W 2/2, where L is the longest 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

dimension and W is the shortest dimension. The log -rank test compared the survival curves 

between the study arms. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism. Growth 

curves and Kaplan -Meier curves of survival were plotted. Survival between cohorts was 

compar ed using log -rank tests. 

H&E and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, and automated image analyses 

Tumors were harvested and fixed in Rapid -Fixx (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH), then 

submitted to the BIDMC histology core facility (RRID:SCR_009669) for paraffin embedding, 

sectioning, H&E staining, and performing CD45 IHC using their standard protocol. C D45 

IHC was performed using a rat anti -mouse CD45 monoclonal antibody clone 30 -F11 at 1:250 

dilution (#14 -0451 -82, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a goat anti -rat IgG 

horseradish peroxidase polymer secondary antibody at 1:1 dilution (# ab214882, Abcam Inc, 

Waltham, MA). QuPath software was used to segment and classify cells as tumor or stromal 

on H&E images, and quantify CD45+ cells on IHC images. [39,40] 

Spatially resolved miRNA assay 

A spatially resolved miRNA assay is applied to tumor samples treated for 10 days to attain the 

spatial miRNA data. Assay device fabrication and the assay process were performed using 

methods as described in prior work. [14] The assay device consists of a nanoliter well array 

with hydrogel posts embedded within each well. The hydrogels were functionalized with 

DNA probes that had complementary sequences to the miRNAs in our panel ( S1 Table ). The 

relative positioning of the hydrogel posts within each well was designed such that each post in 

that position would target the same miRNA sequence. The miRNA assay with Rolling Circle 

Amplification (RCA) was applied to each sample as previously desc ribed, and the bound 

miRNA/DNA complexes were fluorescently labeled which allowed for quantitation. [14] 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Spatial miRNA data pre -processing 

The spatial miRNA data acquired from the assay required pre -processing prior to any 

subsequent analysis (LDA, SSIM, etc.). Utilizing microscope images of the samples during 

the assay ( S7 Fig ), the portion of the array that was overlapped by tissue, as opposed to the 

surrounding area outside the sample, was manually outlined and used as a tissue mask so that 

only miRNA values within the tissue region were retained. The bulk miRNA expression pe r

tumor was compared between the groups using two -way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism. 

Šídák's multiple comparisons test was used to compare between two groups, and comparisons 

that achieved adjusted p<0.05 were reported. 

For LDA model training, the masked spatial miRNA data were processed further in 

order to ensure optimal performance. First, pixels outside the tissue mask were assigned a 

value of 0, and an alternate dataset was created in which these masked -out pixels were instead 

assigned a small positive constant (ε), to provide a safe variant of the data for any logarithmic 

analyses downstream in the pipeline. Training the LDA model in MATLAB (MathWorks, 

Natick, MA) required restructuring the miRNA data so that the preserved 2D spatial 

information was linearized by row for all samples and concatenated into a single array for 

LDA model training. Given this systematic linearization of the data, we were able to 

transform the results back into the original spatial configuration for visualization and 

subsequent analysis. 

Case -study -wide spatial LDA implementation 

Given the efficacy of the LDA training hyperparameters in prior work [14] , an initial 4 -topic 

LDA model was trained on the entirety of the miRNA data derived from all the 10 -day treated 

tumors. Collapsed Gibbs Sampling was used as the inference algorithm, as it has been shown 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

to yield more accurate topic discovery despite taking longer to train (training time is 

negligible, approximately ~21 minutes). [41] As opposed to utilizing word frequencies when 

training the LDA model, we used scaled word counts. The quantified miRNA values per well 

were on the order of 3 -4 attomoles at most and LDA requires integer word counts, so we 

scaled the values by multiplying every miRNA count by 10 4 to preserve as much of the data 

as possible prior to conversion. Once the LDA model was trained, we used the topic word 

probabilities to visualize the contribution of each miRNA to each topic via word clouds. 

Applying the trained LDA model on all samples spatially yielded the colored topic maps ( S5 

Fig ). The relative abundance of each color -defined topic was then calculated per tumor 

section to obtain the topic -tumor percentages. Ultimately the LDA output was used to stratify 

the tumor samples by using the topic -tumor percentages as observations in a cas e-study -wide 

PCA, whereby the contribution of the topics (PCA variables) could be noted for each 

principal component to enable trend interpretation. 

PCA statistical methods 

To assess separation between treatment response groups (resistant versus sensitive), we 

compared the scores along the first principal component (PC1) for treated tumors that were 

ultimately classified as olaparib -sensitive versus olaparib -resistant ( n=9 per group). PC1 

scores between these two groups were compared using a two -sided Mann -Whitney U test. A 

p-value<0.05 was considered statistically significant. 

Priming -based specialized LDA analysis for treatment -sensitive tumors 

In addition to the case -study -wide LDA workflow, a data priming technique was applied to 

the sensitive tumors in order to bias the model to stratify them along treatment type, a use that 

is conceptually consistent with other priming methods in computer vis ion and other machine 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

learning applications [42 –45] . We initially examined all the miRNA probabilities associated 

with all the LDA topics, then for each miRNA we noted the highest probabilities found across 

all the topics ( S2 Table ). The miRNA probabilities were then stored in a vector and treated as 

a form of weights whose values were multiplied to all the spatial miRNA input values for our 

sensitive tumors. The primed input was then passed through the case -study -wide LDA model 

and the LDA topics were reassigned and used to stratify olaparib -sensitive samples by 

treatment type. 

Tumor and immune cell data processing 

Tumor and stromal cell count data were obtained from Qu Path and by noting the position and 

orientation of the tumor sections as they were superimposed on our spatial miRNA 

quantification device while being assayed ( S7 Fig ). Using MATLAB, we quantified the 

amount of tumor, stroma, and immune cells that occupy the same position as the miRNAs. 

We defined immune cell infiltration as the normalized ratio of immune cells to tumor cells. 

First, we defined a tissue mask such that all locations containing immune or tumor cells are 

included; we then log -transformed the ratio at all locations (x,y) while adding a small positive 

constant ε and where r(x,y) represents the new ratio ( Equation 1 ): 

𝑟 (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) = log (𝐼𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑒 (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) + 𝜀 

𝑇𝑢𝑚𝑜𝑟 (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) + 𝜀 ) (1)

We then remapped the ratios from zero to one via a logistic transform such that values below 

0.5 correspond to relatively immune -deficient regions and values above 0.5 correspond to 

relatively immune -enriched regions (Equation 2): 

Remapped (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) = 1

1 + 𝑒 −𝑟 (𝑥 ,𝑦 ) (2)

Pixels outside the tissue mask were excluded from downstream normalization. Next, we re -

normalized the ratio on a per tumor basis such that the maximum ratio was set to one and the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

lowest to zero. Lastly, we clipped the values at the median (50 th percentile) within the tissue 

mask and renormalized the clipped values to [0,1]. The reasoning behind the renormalization 

is to make the final ratio compatible for use with SSIM. Since our second data type (miRNA 

topic maps) being input to the SSIM pipelin e are effectively binarized masks and the spatial 

similarity between these masks and a ratio where most values are close to zero (given the 

large difference in immune cell vs tumor cell count), we needed to highlight the significance 

of the immune cell inf iltration via remapping and signal normalization. 

SSIM map formulation 

SSIM maps were created in order to encapsulate the structural similarity between our spatial 

immune cell infiltration ratios and the case -study -wide LDA -derived miRNA topic maps. In 

essence, SSIM compares two images within a local neighborhood around each pixel by 

evaluating agreement in l ocal mean intensity, local contrast (variance), and local structure 

(covariance). This yields a so -called structural similarity index that ranges from -1 to 1, where 

1 indicates high local structural similarity, 0 indicates no detectable structural correla tion, and 

-1 indicates strong local anti -correlation (i.e., the structures being compared are inverted 

relative to one another). We used the built -in SSIM function in MATLAB to formulate the 

maps where an approximately ~7 x7 pixel neighborhood was chosen given the total 28x28 

tumor map size. 

LDA -SSIM implementation 

An LDA model was trained on the SSIM maps between the immune cell infiltration ratio 

maps and the top two miRNA topic maps (let -7a - and miR -21 -dominated) in the same manner 

described for the case -study -wide LDA implementation. The 3 LDA topics learned consisted 

of probabilities of the two SSIM map types (let -7a -immune SSIM and miR -21 -immune 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

SSIM) and were applied spatially and statistically summarized into topic percentages within 

each tumor and represented via color. The spatial topic assignment was done similarly to the 

miRNA LDA model but with the added complexity of adding a color depth e lement to the 

maps such that the level of structural similarity can be gleaned in addition to which SSIM was 

most similar for any given region in the tumor. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Institute s of Health (NIH) 

R01CA235740 to PSD and FJS, R35CA232105 to FJS, R01CA226776 to GMW, 

R21CA267088 to YJH and GMW. GMW is also supported by the Breast Cancer Research 

Foundation 24 -177. This work was supported in part by the Koch Institute Support (core) 

Gra nt P30 -CA14051 from the National Cancer Institute. We thank the Koch Institute's Robert 

A. Swanson (1969) Biotechnology Center for technical support, specifically the microscopy 

core. This work was in part supported by a graduate fellowship to ONM from the Ludwig 

Center at MIT’s Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research. This work was in part 

supported by the Takeda pharmaceutical graduate fellowship to ONM. Fig 1A was partially 

created with BioRender.com. 

Data Availability Statement 

All data and code are publicly available and can be accessed via Zenodo repository :

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18499891 

Conflicts of Interest 

GMW declares associated, institutional research funding from Mersana, Gilead, Seagen, 

Celcuity, Totus Medicines, Pfizer, and Genentech but declares no non -financial competing 

interests. The other authors declare no competing financial or non -financial inte rests. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

# References 

1. Scully R, Livingston DM. In search of the tumour -suppressor functions of BRCA1 and 

BRCA2. Nature. 2000;408: 429 –432. doi:10.1038/35044000 

2. Robson M, Im S -A, Senkus E, Xu B, Domchek SM, Masuda N, et al. Olaparib for 

Metastatic Breast Cancer in Patients with a Germline BRCA Mutation. N Engl J Med. 

2017;377: 523 –533. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1706450 

3. McCabe N, Turner NC, Lord CJ, Kluzek K, Białkowska A, Swift S, et al. Deficiency in 

the Repair of DNA Damage by Homologous Recombination and Sensitivity to 

Poly( ADP -Ribose) Polymerase Inhibition. Cancer Res. 2006;66: 8109 –8115. 

doi:10.1158/0008 -5472.CAN -06 -0140 

4. Hopkins TA, Shi Y, Rodriguez LE, Solomon LR, Donawho CK, DiGiammarino EL, et 

al. Mechanistic Dissection of PARP1 Trapping and the Impact on In Vivo Tolerability 

and Efficacy of PARP Inhibitors. Mol Cancer Res. 2015;13: 1465 –1477. 

doi:10.1158/1541 -7786.MCR -15 -0191 -T

5. Gelmon KA, Tischkowitz M, Mackay H, Swenerton K, Robidoux A, Tonkin K, et al. 

Olaparib in patients with recurrent high -grade serous or poorly differentiated ovarian 

carcinoma or triple -negative breast cancer: a phase 2, multicentre, open -label, non -

randomised study. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12: 852 –861. do i:10.1016/S1470 -

2045(11)70214 -5

6. Fong PC, Yap TA, Boss DS, Carden CP, Mergui -Roelvink M, Gourley C, et al. 

Poly(ADP) -Ribose Polymerase Inhibition: Frequent Durable Responses in BRCA 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Carrier Ovarian Cancer Correlating With Platinum -Free Interval. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28: 

2512 –2519. doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.26.9589 

7. Sandhu SK, Schelman WR, Wilding G, Moreno V, Baird RD, Miranda S, et al. The 

poly(ADP -ribose) polymerase inhibitor niraparib (MK4827) in BRCA mutation carriers 

and patients with sporadic cancer: a phase 1 dose -escalation trial. Lancet Oncol. 

2013;14: 882 –892. doi:10.1016/S1470 -2045(13)70240 -7

8. Stenvold H, Donnem T, Andersen S, Al -Saad S, Valkov A, Pedersen MI, et al. High 

tumor cell expression of microRNA -21 in node positive non -small cell lung cancer 

predicts a favorable clinical outcome. BMC Clin Pathol. 2014;14: 1 –9. 

doi:10.1186/1472 -6890 -14 -9

9. Tang W, Zhu J, Su S, Wu W, Liu Q, Su F, et al. MiR -27 as a Prognostic Marker for 

Breast Cancer Progression and Patient Survival. PLOS ONE. 2012;7: e51702. 

doi:10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0051702 

10. Eilertsen M, Andersen S, Al -Saad S, Richardsen E, Stenvold H, Hald SM, et al. Positive 

prognostic impact of miR -210 in non -small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2014;83: 

272 –278. doi:10.1016/J.LUNGCAN.2013.11.005 

11. Nielsen BS, Jørgensen S, Fog JU, Søkilde R, Christensen IJ, Hansen U, et al. High levels 

of microRNA -21 in the stroma of colorectal cancers predict short disease -free survival in 

stage II colon cancer patients. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011;28: 27 –38. 

doi:10. 1007/S10585 -010 -9355 -7

12. Quesne JL, Jones J, Warren J, Dawson SJ, Ali HR, Bardwell H, et al. Biological and 

prognostic associations of miR -205 and let -7b in breast cancer revealed by in situ 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

hybridization analysis of micro -RNA expression in arrays of archival tumour tissue. J 

Pathol. 2012;227: 306 –314. doi:10.1002/PATH.3983 

13. Hanna JA, Wimberly H, Kumar S, Slack F, Agarwal S, Rimm DL. Quantitative analysis 

of microRNAs in tissue microarrays by in situ hybridization. BioTechniques. 2012;52: 

235 –245. doi:10.2144/000113837 

14. Mohd ON, Heng YJ, Wang L, Thavamani A, Massicott ES, Wulf GM, et al. Sensitive 

Multiplexed MicroRNA Spatial Profiling and Data Classification Framework Applied to 

Murine Breast Tumors. Anal Chem. 2024;96: 12729 –12738. 

doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.4c01773 

15. Fritsch C, Huang A, Chatenay -Rivauday C, Schnell C, Reddy A, Liu M, et al. 

Characterization of the Novel and Specific PI3Kα Inhibitor NVP -BYL719 and 

Development of the Patient Stratification Strategy for Clinical Trials. Mol Cancer Ther. 

2014;13: 1117 –1129. doi:10.1158/1535 -7163.MCT -13 -0865 

16. Von Hoff DD, Wagner AJ, LoRusso PM, Tibes R, Jin J, Ware JA, et al. 1205 A first -in -

human Phase I study to evaluate the pan -PI3K inhibitor GDC -0941 administered QD or 

BID in patients with advanced solid tumours. Eur J Cancer Suppl. 2009;7: 122. 

doi:10.1016/S1359 -6349(09)70417 -3

17. Kumar A, Fernandez -Capetillo O, Carrera AC. Nuclear phosphoinositide 3 -kinase beta 

controls double -strand break DNA repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107: 7491 –

7496. doi:10.1073/pnas.0914242107 

18. Juvekar A, Burga LN, Hu H, Lunsford EP, Ibrahim YH, Balmañà J, et al. Combining a 

PI3K Inhibitor with a PARP Inhibitor Provides an Effective Therapy for BRCA1 -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Related Breast Cancer. Cancer Discov . 2012;2: 1048 –1063. doi:10.1158/2159 -8290.CD -

11 -0336 

19. Wang D, Wang M, Jiang N, Zhang Y, Bian X, Wang X, et al. Effective use of PI3K 

inhibitor BKM120 and PARP inhibitor Olaparib to treat PIK3CA mutant ovarian cancer. 

Oncotarget. 2016;7: 13153 –13166. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.7549 

20. Matulonis UA, Wulf GM, Barry WT, Birrer M, Westin SN, Farooq S, et al. Phase I dose 

escalation study of the PI3kinase pathway inhibitor BKM120 and the oral poly (ADP 

ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib for the treatment of high -grade serous 

ovaria n and breast cancer. Ann Oncol. 2017;28: 512 –518. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw672 

21. Konstantinopoulos PA, Barry WT, Birrer M, Westin SN, Cadoo KA, Shapiro GI, et al. 

Olaparib and α -specific PI3K inhibitor alpelisib for patients with epithelial ovarian 

cancer: a dose -escalation and dose -expansion phase 1b trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20: 

570 –580. doi:10.1016/S1470 -2045(18)30905 -7

22. Wang L, Wang D, Sonzogni O, Ke S, Wang Q, Thavamani A, et al. PARP -inhibition 

reprograms macrophages toward an anti -tumor phenotype. Cell Rep. 2022;41: 111462. 

doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111462 

23. Pantelidou C, Sonzogni O, De Oliveria Taveira M, Mehta AK, Kothari A, Wang D, et al. 

PARP Inhibitor Efficacy Depends on CD8+ T -cell Recruitment via Intratumoral STING 

Pathway Activation in BRCA -Deficient Models of Triple -Negative Breast Cancer. 

Cancer Disc ov. 2019;9: 722 –737. doi:10.1158/2159 -8290.CD -18 -1218 

24. Pantelidou C, Jadhav H, Kothari A, Liu R, Wulf GM, Guerriero JL, et al. STING 

agonism enhances anti -tumor immune responses and therapeutic efficacy of PARP 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

inhibition in BRCA -associated breast cancer. NPJ Breast Cancer. 2022;8: 102. 

doi:10.1038/s41523 -022 -00471 -5

25. Salem ML, Diaz -Montero CM, EL -Naggar SA, Chen Y, Moussa O, Cole DJ. The TLR3 

agonist poly(I:C) targets CD8+ T cells and augments their antigen -specific responses 

upon their adoptive transfer into naïve recipient mice. Vaccine. 2009;27: 549 –557. 

doi:10.101 6/j.vaccine.2008.11.013 

26. Nagarajan MB, Tentori AM, Zhang WC, Slack FJ, Doyle PS. Spatially resolved and 

multiplexed MicroRNA quantification from tissue using nanoliter well arrays. Microsyst 

Nanoeng 2020 61. 2020;6: 1 –9. doi:10.1038/s41378 -020 -0169 -8

27. Wang Z, Bovik AC, Sheikh HR, Simoncelli EP. Image quality assessment: from error 

visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Trans Image Process. 2004;13: 600 –612. 

doi:10.1109/TIP.2003.819861 

28. Wang L, Sardella BR, Aronson EK, Liu Z, Li X, Wulf GM, et al. Simultaneous 

inhibition of PARP/AKT to intercept nascent BRCA1/2mut breast tumors. Npj Breast 

Cancer. 2026. doi:10.1038/s41523 -026 -00892 -6

29. Juvekar A, Hu H, Yadegarynia S, Lyssiotis CA, Ullas S, Lien EC, et al. 

Phosphoinositide 3 -kinase inhibitors induce DNA damage through nucleoside depletion. 

Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2016;113: E4338 –E4347. doi:10.1073/pnas.1522223113 

30. Tentori AM, Nagarajan MB, Kim JJ, Zhang WC, Slack FJ, Doyle PS. Quantitative and 

multiplex microRNA assays from unprocessed cells in isolated nanoliter well arrays. 

Lab Chip. 2018;18: 2410 –2424. doi:10.1039/C8LC00498F 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

31. Chapin SC, Doyle PS. Ultrasensitive multiplexed microRNA quantification on encoded 

gel microparticles using rolling circle amplification. Anal Chem. 2011;83: 7179 –7185. 

doi:10.1021/AC201618K/SUPPL_FILE/AC201618K_SI_002.AVI 

32. Al Sulaiman D, Juthani N, Doyle PS. Quantitative and Multiplex Detection of 

Extracellular Vesicle -Derived MicroRNA via Rolling Circle Amplification within 

Encoded Hydrogel Microparticles. Adv Healthc Mater. 2022;11: 4 –6. 

doi:10.1002/ADHM.202102332 

33. Yu F, Yao H, Zhu P, Zhang X, Pan Q, Gong C, et al. let -7 Regulates Self Renewal and 

Tumorigenicity of Breast Cancer Cells. Cell. 2007;131: 1109 –1123. 

doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.054 

34. Dangi -Garimella S, Yun J, Eves EM, Newman M, Erkeland SJ, Hammond SM, et al. 

Raf kinase inhibitory protein suppresses a metastasis signalling cascade involving LIN28 

and let -7. EMBO J. 2009;28: 347 –358. 

doi:10.1038/EMBOJ.2008.294/SUPPL_FILE/EMBJ2008294 -SUP -0002.DOC 

35. Corney DC, Hwang CI, Matoso A, Vogt M, Flesken -Nikitin A, Godwin AK, et al. 

Frequent downregulation of miR -34 family in human ovarian cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 

2010;16: 1119 –1128. doi:10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -09 -2642/351747/P/FREQUENT -

DOWNREGULATION -OF -MIR -34-FAMILY -IN -HUMAN 

36. Lujambio A, Calin GA, Villanueva A, Ropero S, Sánchez -Céspedes M, Blanco D, et al. 

A microRNA DNA methylation signature for human cancer metastasis. Proc Natl Acad 

Sci U S A. 2008;105: 13556 –13561. 

doi:10.1073/PNAS.0803055105/SUPPL_FILE/0803055105SI.PDF 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

37. Wang H, Tan Z, Hu H, Liu H, Wu T, Zheng C, et al. microRNA -21 promotes breast 

cancer proliferation and metastasis by targeting LZTFL1. BMC Cancer. 2019;19: 738. 

doi:10.1186/s12885 -019 -5951 -3

38. Takemura R, Takaki H, Okada S, Shime H, Akazawa T, Oshiumi H, et al. PolyI:C –

Induced, TLR3/RIP3 -Dependent Necroptosis Backs Up Immune Effector –Mediated 

Tumor Elimination In Vivo. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015;3: 902 –914. doi:10.1158/2326 -

6066.CIR -14 -0219 

39. Bankhead P, Loughrey MB, Fernández JA, Dombrowski Y, McArt DG, Dunne PD, et 

al. QuPath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis. Sci Rep. 2017;7: 

16878. doi:10.1038/s41598 -017 -17204 -5

40. Baker GM, Bret -Mounet VC, Wang T, Veta M, Zheng H, Collins LC, et al. 

Immunohistochemistry scoring of breast tumor tissue microarrays: A comparison study 

across three software applications. J Pathol Inform. 2022;13: 100118. 

doi:10.1016/j.jpi.2022.100118 

41. Griffiths TL, Steyvers M. Finding scientific topics. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2004;101: 5228 –

5235. doi:10.1073/pnas.0307752101 

42. Ajjour Y, Wachsmuth H. Exploring LLM Priming Strategies for Few -Shot Stance 

Classification. In: Chistova E, Cimiano P, Haddadan S, Lapesa G, Ruiz -Dolz R, editors. 

Proceedings of the 12th Argument mining Workshop. Vienna, Austria: Association for 

Computational Linguistics; 2025. pp. 11 –23. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.argmining -1.2 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

43. Ren M, Zeng W, Yang B, Urtasun R. Learning to Reweight Examples for Robust Deep 

Learning. Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. 

PMLR; 2018. pp. 4334 –4343. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ren18a.html 

44. Kimura M, Hino H. A Short Survey on Importance Weighting for Machine Learning. 

Trans Mach Learn Res. 2024 [cited 6 Feb 2026]. Available: 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=IhXM3g2gxg 

45. Fincke S, Agarwal S, Miller S, Boschee E. Language Model Priming for Cross -Lingual 

Event Extraction. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell. 2022;36: 10627 –10635. 

doi:10.1609/aaai.v36i10.21307 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.01.12.698824 doi: bioRxiv preprint