Title: Driver-associated transcriptional rewiring reveals conditional genetic vulnerabilities in cancer

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 52

Markdown Content:
1

## Driver -associated transcriptional rewiring reveals conditional genetic 

## vulnerabilitie s in cancer 

Sara Geraghty 1, Jacob A. Boyer 1,3 , Mahya Fazel -Zarandi 1, Nibal Arzouni 1, Rolf -Peter Ryseck 1,

Matthew J. McBride 1, 2, Lance R. Parsons 1, Joshua D. Rabinowitz 1, 3,4, Mona Singh 1, 5,6,* 

ABSTRACT : Mutations within cancer driver genes induce widespread transcriptional changes that reflect altered 

cellular states and can reveal associated genetic vulnerabilities. However, it remains challenging to determine 

which genes are dysregulated as a consequence of cancer alterations , and of these, which represent therapeutic 

opportunities . Here, w e present Dyscovr, an integrative computational framework that leverages somatic 

mutation, gene expression, copy number alteration, methylation, and clinical data from primary tumors to identify 

driver -associated transcriptional changes . Dyscovr then uses these transcriptional changes as a biologically 

grounded starting point, inte grating them with cancer cell line data to prioritize genes whose inhibition is predicted 

to reduce viability either specifically in driver -mutant contexts or in combination with driver inhibition. Applied 

both pan -cancer and across 19 tumor types, Dyscovr uncovers hundreds of such conditional vulnerabilities. As 

a case study, we newly implicate —and experimentally validate —KBTBD2 as a gene whose inhibition enhances 

the efficacy of PI3K inhibitors in PIK3CA -mutant breast cancer cell lines . The Dyscovr software 

(github.com/Singh -Lab/Dyscovr) and predictions (dyscovr.princeton.edu) provide a platform and resource for 

linking mutated driver genes to conditional genetic vulnerabilities and for prioritizing these relationships for 

experimental and therapeutic investigation. 

KEYWORDS: cancer systems biology, gene regulation, con ditional genetic vulnerabilities  

> 1

Lewis -Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544  

> 2

Department of Chemical Biology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854  

> 3

Ludwig Cancer Institute, Princeton Branch, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08554  

> 4

Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544  

> 5

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544  

> 6

Lead Contact 

*Correspondence: mona@cs.princeton.edu 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

INTRODUCTION 

The personalized medicine approach to cancer treatment has largely focused on targeting an individual's 

altered cancer driver genes. This strategy has shown considerable promise and is now routine in the clinic ,

enabled by the widespread use of mutational profiling panels (e.g. MSK -IMPACT 1) and the emergence of drugs 

that specifically inhibit mutated driver genes 2. However, not all patients with a targetable mutation respond to the 

corresponding therapy , and among those that do, tumors frequently acquire resistance , often through 

reactivati on of the same oncogenic pathway. These limitations highlight the need for additional strategies to 

enhance the durability and effectiveness of personalized cancer treatments. 

Mutations within driver genes affect more than just the gene itself , initiat ing  cascades of molecular events 

that rewire transcriptional programs across the genome. These changes can reveal dysregulated genes that are 

functionally relevant to the driver -mutant context and that may also constitute candidate therapeutic targets .

Because many genes may be dysregulated downstream of a driver alteration , o ne promising direction is to 

identify which of these genes participate in genetic interactions with the driver , particularly those that represent 

conditional genetic vulnerabilities such that their inhibition compromises cell viability either in the context of a 

somatically altered driver or in combination with pharmacologic inhibition of the driver. Focusing on 

transcriptionally dysregulated genes is advantageous: because transcriptional rewiring ref lects the functional 

state of tumor cell s, it provide s a biologically grounded starting point for discovering such conditional genetic 

vulnerabilities , rather than considering all possible genes . Accordingly, a systematic computational approach 

that first uncover s driver -associated transcriptional changes and then evaluates the dysregulated genes for 

genetic interactions offers a principled path for identifying both individual drug targets and co -targets that may 

enable more durable therapeutic responses. 

Here, we introduce Dyscovr,  an approach for identifying genes that are transcriptionally dysregulated and 

that participate in driver -associated genetic interactions . Dyscovr first identifies robust driver -associated 

transcriptional changes by integrat ing multiomic data from primary tumors, while accounting for molecular and 

clinical covariates that influence baseline gene expression. It then leverages functional genetic screening data 

from cancer cell lines to determine which dysregulated genes genetically interact with the driver and to prioritize 

the subset that represents candidate conditional genetic vulnerabilities with therapeutic potential .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Despite major progress in cancer systems biology, to our knowledge, no existing approach jointly links 

driver mutations to their genome -wide transcriptional consequences in a way that enables the discovery of 

genetic interactions with the driver. Prior research has instead examined related problems within these two areas 

in isolation, leaving the relationship between driver -associated transcriptional rewiring and conditional genetic 

vulnerabilities largely unexplored. A significant portion of research relat ing somatic mutations to expression 

changes has focused on identifying cancer genes or pathways by assessing whether direct interaction partners 

or network -proximal genes are dysregulated 3–10 . These approaches typically rely on a priori knowledge of 

regulatory or protein -protein interaction networks, which can restrict analyses to predefined relationships and 

limit the ir ability to capture the impact of gene -level somatic alterations on the full transcriptome . Other 

approaches model the impact of somatic mutation s on regulatory activity, such as transcription factor activit y11,12 ,

provid ing insight into altered regulatory programs but without directly relating somatic mutations to quantitative 

expression changes across all genes . Simple r statistical tests have also been proposed to identify genes with 

altered expression with respect to somatic mutations in other genes 13 , but do not account for key confounding 

factors that affect gene expression in cancer, such as copy number alteration (CNA) or DNA methylation 

changes . Finally, while expression quantitative loci ( eQTL ) analysis ─a cornerstone of gene regulation and 

variant impact research that has shown great success in linking individual variants to a gene ’s expression 

levels 14 ─has also been applied in the cancer context 15 , it is primarily designed to link germline variants to gene 

expression changes and can be difficult to apply to somatic mutations, which are rarer, heterogeneous across 

tumors, and often confounded by other genomic alterations. As a result, previous approaches do not provide a 

comp lete view of the global transcriptional impact of somatic mutations in cancer or systematically nominate 

dysregulated genes for further therapeutic investigation. 

A separate line of research has aimed to uncover genetic vulnerabilities in cancer . This work has largely 

focused on identifying synthetic lethal (SL) interactions , in which inactivation of one gene (e.g. a mutated tumor 

suppressor) renders the other essential, and synthetic dosage lethal interactions , where overexpression of one 

gene (e.g. an oncogene) renders the other gene essential 16 . Approaches for identifying these interactions include 

supervised learning on known SL interactions 17 –19 , statistically uncovering signals such as mutual exclusivity of 

genetic alteration s in human tumor data 20 –22 , and analyzing depen den cies in cell line screens 23 –25 . However, 

these methods do not link predicted vulnerabilities to the transcriptional consequences of driver gene mutation ,

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

and many are not grounded in molecular data from primary patient tumors . Further , in contrast to previous 

approaches, Dyscov r distinguish es between two classes of driver -associated genetic interaction s with distinct 

therapeutic implications : (i) cases in which a mutated driver gene induces or enhances a dependency on a

transcriptionally dysregulated gene , nominating that gene as a target for a single -agent strategy in that molecular 

context (i.e. “acquired vulnerabilities”) ; and (ii) cases in which joint inhibition of the driver and the dysregulated 

gene negatively impacts cell growth , indicating a co -targeting strategy (i.e. “co -targeting vulnerabilities”) . In 

particular, the second class nominates candidate combination strategies involving j oint inhibit ion of an oncogenic 

driver and a tran scriptionally dysregulated partner gene to more effectively suppress tumor growth. Because 

many driver alterations involve activating mutations in oncogenes rather than loss of tumor suppressors, 

approaches that can identify such co -targeting relationships are critical, yet these relationships are not directly 

captured by traditional cancer SL discovery methods. 

Dyscovr is a modular framework composed of two main stages. In the first stage, Dyscovr leverages 

multiomic data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)  and uses an integrative linear regression framework to 

uncover genes whose expression is significantly altered in tumors with mutations in a given driver gene. 

Conceptually, Dyscovr builds on eQTL analysis in several key ways: it model s gene -gene associations by 

aggregating nonsynonymous somatic mutations across sites within a gene , accounts for the effects of multiple 

mutated genes with in the same model , and integrates numerous other molecular and clinical factors that are 

critical for the cancer context . In the second stage, Dyscovr uses genome -wide knockout screening data from 

the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap) 26  to determine which of these transcriptionally altered genes exhibit 

genetic interactions with the driver gene  and, among these interactions, which correspond to conditional genetic 

vulnerabilities with therapeutic potential . Importantly, once t he se relationships are learned from TCGA and 

DepMap data, they can be used to prioritize candidate therapeutic vulnerabilities based solely on driver mutation 

profiles, which are routinely obtained in clinical settings. 

Across 19 cancer types, Dyscovr reveals hundreds of significant and novel associations between driver 

genes and transcriptionally dysregulated targets, including a subset predicted to participate in genetic 

interactions with the driver gene and to represent previously uncharacterized candidate therapeutic 

vulnerabilities. We demonstrate the power of Dyscovr in breast cancer by identifying and validating a genetic 

interaction between PIK3CA and KBTBD2, a gene we implicate as a cancer -relevant positive regula tor of the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

PI3K -AKT pathway and insulin signaling . Our experiments show that inhibiting KBTBD2 enhances the efficacy 

of PI3K inhibitors specifically in PIK3CA -mutant breast cancer cell lines, suggesting a new combinatorial strategy 

for treating PIK3CA -mutant breast tumors .

Overall, Dyscovr provides a systematic framework for connecting mutated cancer driver genes to 

downstream transcriptional dysregulation and for prioritizing potential driver -specific therapeutic vulnerabilities ,

including both candidate single -agent targets and co -targets for combination therapy. By integrating tumor 

multiomic data with functional dependency screens, Dyscovr identifies genetic interactions linked to specific 

oncogenic alterations, offering a pri ncipled approach for nominating combinatorial therapeutic stra tegies. 

Dyscovr is available both open source (github.com/Singh -Lab/Dyscovr) and as an interactive web resource 

(dyscovr.princeton.edu), facilitating future experimental efforts to translate these findings into therapeutic 

strategies. 

## RESULTS 

Overview of Dyscovr Framework 

Dyscovr is a framework that both links somatically mutated cancer driver genes to transcriptional changes 

and subsequently identifies con ditional genetic vulnerabilities (Fig. 1). Dyscovr integrates matched mutation, 

CNA, methylation, and expression data from primary tumor samples from the TCGA (Fig. 1A ) and focuses on 

the set S of known cancer driver genes 27 that frequently (≥5%) possess nonsynonymous mutations in the given 

patient cohort (Fig. 1B). This restriction ensures that each driver has sufficient mutated samples for reliable 

association testing while focusing the analysis on mutations most likely to alter protein function. 

In the first phase , for each candidate gene in the human genome, Dyscovr fit s a linear regression model 

that jointly estimate s the association between the gene’s expression and the nonsynonymous mutation status of 

each driver gene d in S. The model also accounts for other factors that may influence gene expression, including :

CNA and methylation status of each driver; the putative downstream gene’s mutation, CNA, and methylation 

status; and sample -level covariates (e.g. patient age, sex , treatment status, tumor subtype, estimated fraction of 

infiltrating immune cells, genotypic variation, etc.) (Fig. 1C , Methods I -IV ). For each regression performed, 

Dyscovr extracts the fit coefficients corresponding to driver mutation status and performs per -driver multiple 

hypothesis testing correction, yielding a ranked set of associations between mutated driver and dysregulated 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

target genes with associated q-values, estimated magnitudes, and directionalities. We apply this framework both 

pan -cancer and within each of the 19 TCGA cancer types with at least 75 samples possessing all required data 

types , us ing q < 0.2 as a significance threshold. Because q-values tend to be smaller with an increased number 

of tumor samples considered, we report results for the pan -cancer analysis using a q < 0.01 threshold. 

In the second phase , Dyscovr leverages these predicted transcriptional dysregulation effects to uncover 

genes that are involved in genetic interactions with the associated cancer driver genes and , of these, which 

constitute conditional genetic vulnerabilities with therapeutic potential (Fig. 1D, Methods VII I). For each driver -

target pair identified as significant in the first part of Dyscovr —both pan -cancer and within at least one individual 

cancer type —we fit a second linear regression model to evaluate wh ether driver gene activity (measured by 

nonsynonymous mutation status and gene expression levels) influences cell viability following knockout of the 

target gene , while accounting for cancer type. In the absence of a genetic interaction, driver activity is not 

expected to affect cell viability upon target gene knockout. We apply this model across 693 cancer cell lines from 

the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap), using q < 0.2 as our significance threshold. 

Dyscovr ’s Predicted Dysregulated Targets are Enriched in Cancer -Related Genes and Known Functional 

Interactors. 

We first apply the initial stage of the Dyscovr framework to uncover relationships between 

nonsynonymous mutations in recurrently mutated cancer driver genes and the expression of 16,447 putative 

target genes with sufficient data and variability across patient samples (Methods IV.A , Data S1 ). Although 

Dyscovr models multiple molecular features, we focus our interpretation on the mutation coefficients for each 

driver gene. This reflects both the routine clinical availability of mutational data in tumor prof iling and our goal of 

generating mutation -centered predictions that are feasible to validate and incorporate into therapeutic strategies. 

Across primary samples spanning 32 cancer types in the TCGA, four annotated cancer driver genes 27 

are mutated at greater than 5% frequency overall and in at least two cancer types: TP53 , PIK3CA , KRAS , and 

IDH1 (Table S1). For each of TP53 , PIK3CA , KRAS , and IDH1 , Dyscovr identified hundreds to thousands of 

downstream target genes whose expression is significantly correlated to each driver’s nonsynonymous mutation 

status (Fig . 2A). TP53 , the most highly mutated driver gene across TCGA samples, accounts for the largest 

number of dysregulated target genes , or ‘hits’, at a q < 0.01 significance threshold. Our results suggest Dyscovr 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

prioritizes each driver’s known targets or functional partners: for TP53, PIK3CA, KRAS, and IDH1 , each gene’s 

hits were significantly enriched in either the driver’s transcriptional targets from DoRothEA 28 , if a TF (i.e. TP53 ), 

or in the transcriptional targets of downstream TFs that have been shown the literature to be intermediaries in 

enacting their effects (i.e. PIK3CA, KRAS, and IDH1 ) (Fig. 2B, Table S2). TP53 also has exceptionally well -

classified downstream targets from a variety of other sources, and we find that the hits Dyscovr identifies for 

TP53 are significantly enriched for curated TP53 targets 29 (Fig. 2 C) as well as for targets identified in the TF -

target databases TRRUST 30 and hTFtarget 31 (Table S3). TP53 ’s hits are also significantly enriched in established 

pathway genes from KEGG (hsa04115) 32 and Reactome (R -HSA -3700989 , R -CFA -5628897 ) (Fig. 2 C, Table 

S3 ). Taken together, these strong enrichments across a variety of sources suggest that Dyscovr is effectively 

capturing transcriptional changes in downstream genes, including both direct transcriptional targets and pathway 

targets that may lie further downstream of the mutational event. Notably, approximately 72 % of Dyscovr’s 100 

most significant TP53 -associated hits are not described in any of these curated sources , suggesting that Dyscovr 

can al so nominate previously uncharacterized regulatory relationships even for the most well -studied cancer 

driver genes .

In the case of TP53 , IDH1 , and PIK3CA , each driver genes’ hits are also statistically enriched in known 

cancer -related genes, such as those from the Cancer Gene Census ( CGC )33 (Fig. 2 D, Table 1), highlighting 

Dyscovr’s ability to prioritize genes with cancer -relevant roles. This is further supported by gene set enrichment 

analysis: we find that our driver genes’ targets are also statistically enriched in cancer -related pathways from 

Gen e Ontology (GO) 34 and KEGG 32 (Fig. S1C; Data S2 ). For TP53 , for example, KEGG pathways include cell 

cycle ( q = 7.84 E-09), transcriptional misregulation in cancer (q = 1. 82 E-03), and p53 signaling pathway ( q =

2.19 E-03 ), as well as various metabolic pathways (Data S2 ).

Though an advantage of Dyscovr is its ability to estimate transcriptional changes in putative 

transcriptional targets individually, we find that many of the targets that Dyscovr prioritizes also interact with one 

another. When each driver gene’s top hits are overlaid on the STRING functional protein -protein interaction 

network 35 , subclusters of dysregulated processes emerge. In the case of TP53 ’s top hits, a cluster of 

interconnected, cell cycle -related genes linked directly to TP53 or to one another are visible (Fig. 2E). Similar 

clusters can be observed for the other drivers, such as upregulated MAPK signaling in the case of KRAS and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

downregulated CaMK kinase cascade signaling in the case of IDH1 (Fig. S 2), suggesting that Dyscovr’s results 

can be used to visualize how driver gene mutations disrupt broad functional networks. 

When top hits for each of these drivers are examined individually, known functionally relevant genes are 

apparent (Fig. 2F) . These include TP53 and MDM2 , which form an autoregulatory feedback loop 36 , and KRAS 

mutation and upregulation of DUSP4/6 and ETV4/5 , which are members of the ERK/MAP cascade downstream 

of KRAS 37 . Another example is PIK3CA mutation and upregulation of PIK3R3 , a regulatory subunit of the PI3 -

kinase (PI3K) of which PIK3CA is also a member . Dyscovr also identifies novel relationships with partners 

outside of the drivers’ immediate pathways , such as PIK3CA mutation and upregulation of sphingolipid 

metabolism genes SGPL1 and SPTLC2 . This class of genes has sparked recent interest due to its relevance to 

cancer diagnosis and prognosis, as well as its potential to provide new antitumor targets 38 . These links, which 

are available for browsing on the Dyscovr website, present intriguing, previously unstudied gene -gene 

relationships .

Benchmarking Supports Dyscovr’s Ability to Uncover Dysregulated Targets .

To further evaluate the robustness of Dyscovr’s predict ed driver -target relationships , we perform several 

additional benchmarking and control analyses. When TTN –a gene mutated at greater than 5% frequency in 22 

of these 32 cancers due to its long length –is included in the model, Dyscovr finds only three hits at q < 0.01 (Fig. 

2A, Fig. S1A). Additionally, when randomizing gene expression data, no driver gene has significant hits ( q < 0.2), 

suggesting that Dyscovr’s hits reflect genuine biological signal (Fig . S1B , Methods IV.A ). We also evaluate a

variant of Dyscovr in which only “hotspot” mutations (for KRAS, PIK3CA , and IDH1 ) or nonsense mutations and 

Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer (CIVIC) 39 -supported missense mutations (for TP53 ) are considered. 

We find comparable performance when restricting to well -characterized driver alterations as when aggregating 

all nonsynonymous mutations across genes, as judged by enrichment in CGC genes (Fig. S3A) , DoRothEA 

targets (Fig. S3B) , and TP53 -specific target sets (Fig. S3 C). 

We also compare the first component of Dyscov r, which links mutant cancer driver genes to dysregulated 

target genes , to other methods with comparable aims. We re -implemented muTarget 13 (a Mann -Whitney U 

(MWU) -based method) on our pan -cancer cohort, finding that MWU produces skewed p-values (74.2% of driver -

target pairs significant at adjusted p-value < 0.01, Fig. S4A). When tested on TTN , MWU finds 11,577 of 16,458 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

genes (70.3%) to be significantly dysregulated at adjusted p < 0.01, a dramatic number of false positives. 

Additionally, we observe that MWU results are significantly enriched for immune cell -specific marker genes, likely 

deriving from changes in expression in tumor -infiltrating immune cells rather than neoplastic cells (Fig. S4B). 

This is particularly confounded for IDH1 , which is known to promote changes in the tumor immune 

microenvironment 40 and appears to dominate the MWU signal, highlighting the importance of correcting for the 

fraction of infiltrating immune cells. Across all drivers, the overlap between Dyscovr and MWU’s top genes is 

limited, particularly for PIK3CA and IDH1 (Fig. S4C). Additionally, among the top 500 genes, for example, 

Dyscovr consistently displays a greater proportion of CGC and DoRothEA target genes (Fig. S4C). This is also 

true for TP53 -specific target genes, such as curated TP53 targets 29 and Reactome P53 pathway genes 41 (Fig. 

S4D). We also benchmarked Dyscovr against xseq, a hierarchical Bayesian method that predicts the probability 

that mutations influence gene expression 5. The xseq method uses a gene interaction network as a prior and 

therefore does not output predicted effects on every target gene. Nonetheless, when restricting the output of 

Dyscovr and MWU to the set of genes tested by xseq (i.e. neighbors in the provided interaction network ) and 

testing for enrichment in curated TP53 targets, as well as those from TRRUST 30 , KEGG 32 , Reactome 41 , and 

hTFtarget 31 , Dyscovr is more effective than xseq at prioritizing known targets (Fig. S4E). 

Dyscovr Uncovers Driver -Associated Dysregulated Genes within 19 Cancer Types. 

To discover associations between nonsynonymous ly mutated driver gene s and the expression of other 

gene s in a specific cancer context, we next applied Dyscovr separately to each of the 19 TCGA cancer types 

with at least 75 samples possessing all data types . Each TCGA cancer type has its own unique set of cancer 

driver genes 27 mutated in at least 5% of samples (Fig. S5A ); as such, the landscape of mutated driver -

dysregulated gene pairs identified varies by cancer type (Fig. 3A). While the absolute number of significant hits 

at a fixed q-value threshold is in part dependent upon the number of available samples, all 19 cancer types 

possess at least 10 significant hits at a q < 0.2 threshold (Fig. 3A , Data S4 ).

Interestingly , Dyscovr finds that transcriptional effects of driver mutations display similarity across cancer 

types, as the pairwise Spearman’s rank correlations of mutational coefficients fit by Dyscovr across all putative 

targets are largely positive (Fig. S5B ). These results align with the hypothesis that mutations in cancer driver 

genes tend to affect a core set of downstream genes and processes across tissues. As expected, we still find a

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

great deal of tissue specificity, however, as Dyscovr’s results more strongly replicate when the same tissue type 

is being compared. In the case of breast cancer, Dyscovr’s hits for TCGA -BRCA and external dataset 

METABRIC 42 display high Spearman’s rank correlations (Fig. 3B, Fig. S5C ) and overlap (HG p = 1.18E -07 and 

p = 2.45E -62, respectively) for the two drivers mutated in at least 5% of samples in both TCGA and METABRIC, 

TP53 and PIK3CA . These hits represent genes that are commonly dysregulated across breast cancer subtypes, 

as subtype is included as a covariate in our regression (Methods IV). 

We were particularly interested in targets that are recurrently dysregulated by the same mutated driver 

across multiple cancer types, as these mechanisms might be broadly targetable (Fig. 3C) . Dyscovr identif ies 

several such shared associations with known mechanisms -of -action ; for example, activating PIK3CA mutations 

have been shown to result in upregulation of glypican (GPC) family members, such as GPC4, and consequent 

tumorigenesis in gliomas 43 . However, many recurrent associations identified by Dyscovr have not been 

previously described. For example, Dyscovr link s PIK3CA mutations to FYCO1 overexpression in breast cancer, 

cervical cancer, and low -grade glioma , an association that remains relatively un explored despite evidence that 

FYCO1 has important roles in migration and invasion of tumor cells 44 .

Dyscovr Highlights Putative Genetic Interactions for TP53, PIK3CA, and KRAS .

After identifying genes whose expression is associated with driver gene mutation status , Dyscovr 

evaluates these driver -target relationships to identify genetic interactions and prioritize conditional genetic 

vulnerabilities . Dyscovr us es a regression framework to analyze CRISPR dependency , somatic mutation, and 

gene expression data from the DepMap database 26 , with a single model per driver -target pai r. This model tests 

whether driver nonsynonymous mutation status and gene expression level , both of which serve as proxies for 

driver activity , are associated with cell viability following CRISPR -Cas9 knockout of the target gene , while 

accounting for cancer type ( Fig . 1D, Fig. 4A, Methods VIII) . If no genetic interaction exists, the effect of target -

gene knockout on cell viability should not depend on driver state. For each driver -target pair , evidence from the 

driver mutation and expressi on terms is combined using empirical Brown’s method to obtain a single p-value, 

followed by multiple -hypothesis correction (Methods VIII). Here, w e apply this model to each of our TCGA pan -

cancer driver genes with sufficient mutational diversity across CCLE cell lines ( TP53 , PIK3CA , and KRAS ) and, 

for each driver, to the set of target genes found to be significant ly dysregulated by that driver both pan -cancer 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

and within at least one individual cancer type ( q < 0.2). Using these criteria, Dyscovr systematically identifies 

hundreds of genetic interactions (Fig. 4B, Table S4, Data S5). 

We next demonstrate that Dyscovr’s predicted genetic interactions are enriched for previously reported 

genetic interactors. In particular, we tested Dyscovr’s predictions for enrichment in a set of genetic interactions 

comprised of BioGRID 45 and manually curated genetic interactors from the literature (Fig. 4C, Table S5, Methods 

VIII.B). For each driver gene, ranking its predicted genetic interactions by combined p-value, we observe 

enrichment of gold -standard genetic interactors among Dyscovr’s predicted genetic interactions for all three 

drivers (Fig. 4C), with statistically significant enrichment for TP53 and PIK3CA , as well as strong enrichment for 

KRAS .

Among its predicted genetic interactions, Dyscovr further identifies those with therapeutic relevance ,

distinguis hing cases in which the cancer -associated driver state creates or strengthens a dependency on the 

target (acquired vulnerabilities) from cases in which driver activity appears to buffer the effects of target loss, 

suggesting a potential benefit of join tly inhibit ing of the driver and target (co -targeting vulnerabilities). Because 

tumor suppressors and oncogenes contribute to cancer through differ ent changes in activity, we identify and 

interpret vulnerabilities differently for these two driver classes. Loss of tumor -suppressor activity can arise from 

disruptive nonsynonymous mutations or reduced expression, whereas increased oncogenic activity can result 

from activating mutations or elevated expression. Because loss -of -function in tumor suppressor genes is 

generally difficult to target directly, we focus on acquired vulnerabilities. These are indicated by negative 

associations between tumor suppres sor mutation status and viability upon target knockout, consistent with 

increased sensitivity to target loss in the mutant state, as well as positive associations between tumor suppressor 

expression and viability upon target knockout, consistent with incre ased sensitivity when tumor suppressor 

expression is low (Fig. 4A). For oncogenes, whose activity can often be inhibited pharmacologically, we consider 

both acquired and co -targeting vulnerabilities. Acquired vulnerabilities are indicated by negative assoc iations 

between oncogene activity and viability upon target knockout, whereas co -targeting vulnerabilities are indicated 

by positive associations between oncogene activation and viability upon target knockout, consistent with 

oncogene activity buffering the consequences of target loss (Fig. 4A). 

Dyscovr identifies hundreds of predicted genetic interactions that correspond to these classes of 

conditional genetic vulnerabilities (Fig. 4B). We compare these vulnerabilities with interactions catalogued and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

labeled as SLs in SynLethDB 46 , a database focused cancer -associated SL relationships , as SL interactions 

constitute one of the best -studied forms of genetic vulnerability in cancer . For TP53 , SynLethDB includes SLs in 

TP53 -mutant contexts, corresponding to acquired vulnerabilities, as well as those in TP53 -wild -type contexts, in 

which the presence of functional TP53 increases dependency on the interacting gene, as illustrated by MDM2 .

Because SynLethDB but does not annotate the TP53 context in which each interaction occurs, we test its entries 

for enrichment in a set consisting of Dyscovr’s predicted acquired vulnerabilities as well as its predicted 

interactions in which greater TP53 activity is associated with increased sensitivity to target loss. For the 

oncogenes PIK3CA and KRAS , we focus on Dyscovr’s predicted co -targeting vulnerabilities, which most closely 

correspond to the simultaneous gene inhibition relationships catalogued in SynLethDB for these genes. 

Restricting Dyscovr’s predictions to these corresponding interaction cl asses , we observe enrichment for SLs 

supported by experimental or text mining -based evidence for all three drivers, with statistically significant 

enrichment for TP53 (one -sided GSEA, NES = 1.71, p = 7.05E -05) and positive but non -significant enrichment 

for PIK3CA (NES = 1.26, p = 2.61E -01) and KRAS (NES = 1.15, p = 2.12E -01) . We next consider the landscape 

of computationally predicted SLs included in SynLethDB, which highlights a major gap that Dyscovr helps 

address. Existing computational methods have made str ikingly few predictions for the oncogenes PIK3CA and 

KRAS : only one gene, EGFR , is predicted by any method in SynLethDB to be SL with KRAS , a major limitation 

for an increasingly druggable oncogene 47 . Similarly, only 21 genes were computationally predicted to be SL with 

PIK3CA by any method . In contrast, SynLethDB contains 379 computationally predicted SLs for TP53 , and we 

observe that predicted conditional vulnerabilities from Dyscovr are significantly enriched for these 

computationally predicted SLs (NES = 1.27, p = 3.20E -02). Together, these results suggest that Dyscovr not 

only can recapitulate known interactions but also substantially expands the landscape of predicted vulnerabilities 

for oncogen es that have been underserved by existing computational approaches. 

Closer examination of the putative genetic interactors from Dyscovr reveals both known pairings from the 

literature and novel pairings , spanning both acquired and co -targeting vulnerabilities. The top co -targeting hit for 

KRAS is fibroblast growth factor receptor ( FGFR) adaptor protein FRS2 ; FGFR1 , which signals via FRS2 , has 

been found to mediate adaptive drug response in KRAS -mutant lung cancers, leading to success of a 

combinatorial treatment approach 48 . Notably, Dyscovr identified this link between KRAS and downregulation of 

FRS2 in lung cancer, but not in colon, pancreatic, or uterine: this is in close alignment with previous evidence 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

that this combinatorial treatment strategy is effective only in KRAS -mutant lung cancers and not other KRAS -

mutant cancer types 49 . Similarly, one of Dyscovr’s top acquired vulnerabilities for KRAS is DUSP4 , which is a 

known SL gene of KRAS 50 . Other of KRAS’s top predicted genetic interactor s have also been linked to KRAS 

mutations in a cancer context, such as predicted acquired vulnerability IL17RE 51 and predicted co -targets 

ARFGEF2 52 and NPAS2 53 .

In the case of TP53 , the top predicted acquired vulnerability is USP28 , an oncogene that regulates a 

variety of tumorigenic processes in cancers like squamous cell carcinoma, including cellular proliferation, DNA 

damage repair, and apoptosis. Overexpression of USP28 has been associated with poorer outcomes, leading 

to the development of USP28 -targeting therapeutics 54 . However, USP28 has also been put forth as a candidate 

tumor suppressor, as its deubiquitinating functions play a role in stabilizing tumor suppressor TP53 in vivo 54 . Our 

analysis aligns with th is dual functionality , suggesting that targeting USP28 is most effective in contexts where 

TP53 function has already been disrupted via nonsynonymous mutation and only USP28’s oncogenic role s

remain relevant . Several others of TP53 ’s top predicted genetic interactors have evidence supporting an 

acquired vulnerability , including oncogene CHEK2 55 (modulate s resistance to epirubicin in tandem with TP53 in 

breast cancer 56 ); LBR (promote s cellular proliferation in the absence of TP53 57 ); ACO1/IRP1 (involved in a well -

characterized iron -TP53 feedback loop in cancer 58 ); and CUL9 (promotes TP53 -dependent apoptosis 59 ). Many 

of TP53 ’s other top hits have been reported in the cancer literature, though without a mechanistic relationship to 

TP53 mutations, such as NCDN 60 , PSME4 61 , FAM189 62 , CKAP2L 63 , GHR 64 , and MYO9B 65 .

Many of mutant PIK3CA ’s top predicted genetic interactors have been shown to act via or downstream 

of the PI3K -AKT signaling pathway, such as predicted co -targets TM4SF1 (regulates breast cancer cell migration 

and apoptosis 66 ); SLC7A2 (mediates recruitment of myeloid -derived suppressor cells and tumor 

immunosuppression 67 ); and TCF7L2 (WNT pathway effector shown to mediate colorectal cancer cell migration 

and invasion 68 ), as well as predicted acquired vulnerabilities MOB1A (Hippo pathway member that promotes 

PI3K -AKT signaling 69 ) and MADD (a key cancer survival factor that is phosphorylated by AKT 70 ). Other identified 

hits are involved in insulin signaling and regulation, which activates PI3K -AKT signaling; these include well -

described PIK3CA -interactors IRS2 and IGF1R 71 , which are also candidate oncogenes in a variety of cancer 

types 72,73 .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Each of mutant TP53 , PIK3CA , and KRAS possesses genetic interactors predicted by Dyscovr that are 

targeted by US FDA approved drugs 74 (Fig. 4D , Table S 6). Certain drugs targeting acquired gene vulnerabilities 

are known to have improved effects in the context of driver mutation, such as pazopanib, which targets VEGFR2/ 

KDR and has greater efficacy in TP53 -mutant sarcomas relative to those with wild -type TP53 75 . Additionally, 

some of Dyscovr’s predicted vulnerabilities possess experimental drugs that are effective in combination with 

drugs targeting the driver gene , su ch as the combination of alpelisib (target s mutant PIK3CA ) and bicalutamide 

(target s AR)76 and LY294002 ( targets PI3K) and OSI ‐906 (targets IGF1R )77 . Altogether, the Dyscovr pipeline 

nominates a set of genes whose inhibition may either exploit dependencies associated with driver mutations or 

enhance the efficacy of therapies targeting oncogenic drivers, providing a compendium of candidate interactions 

with potential clinical actionability .

Dyscovr Reveals Genes Co -targetable with Mutant Oncogenes .

As a proof -of -concept demonstrat ion of Dyscovr’s ability to identify candidate genetic interactors with 

potential clinical utility , we focused on PIK3CA , which possesses several inhibitors (including FDA -approved 

alpelisib and mutant -selective RLY -2606 78 ). Among PIK3CA ’s top ten predicted co -targeting partner genes from 

Dyscovr (Table S7 ), we selected an under -studied member of a cullin3 -RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, kelch 

repeat and BTB domain -containing protein 2 ( KBTBD2) for further study . Kelch repeat and BTB domain -

containing proteins are adaptors which provide substrate specificity to the E3 ligase complex 79,80 . Physiologically, 

KBTBD2 has been shown to regulate insulin signaling in adipocytes by controlling stability of PI3K regulatory 

subunit, p85α 81,82 . The function of KBTBD2 in cancer , however, remains unexplored, though it was predicted by 

Dyscovr to be downregulated in relation to PIK3CA mutation pan -cancer ( q = 6.5E -04) and in breast cancer ( q

= 4.8E -02), suggesting a cancer -relevant role . One possible explanation for this pattern is that KBTBD2 

participates in a negative feedback loop regulating PI3K signaling: under normal conditions PI3K activity 

promotes KBTBD2 expression, while KBTBD2 in turn limits pathway signaling through regulation of the PI3K 

regulatory subunit p85α. Constitutive activation of PI3K through oncogenic PIK3CA mutation may therefore 

suppress KBTBD2 expression, disrupting this feedback control (Fig. 5A) . Further implicating KBTBD2 as a 

positive regulator of PI3K signaling in human cancer, co -dependency analysis showed that cells with a high 

dependence on KBTBD2 were most likely to be sensitive to a variety of IGF1R inhibitors (Fig. 5B). Highlighting 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

KBTBD2 as a potential oncogene, we observed a significant reduction in survival rates across tumors in which 

KBTBD2 was highly expressed , both pan -cancer (Fig. 5C) and in breast cancer (Fig. 5D) , with cancer subtypes 

used as covariates in both analyses (Methods IX) .

To interrogate the function of KBTBD2 in vitro , we used siRNA to ablate its expression in the ER+, PI3K 

E545K mutant breast cell line, MCF7. Knockdown of KBTBD2 alone resulted in a 75 -85% reduction in cell growth 

(Fig. 5E, Fig. S6A). Interestingly, knockdown of KBTBD2 at baseline did not alter signaling through the PI3K 

pathway as analyzed by canonical substrates (Fig. S6B), though we did notice a slight increase in p85α 

expression –a regulatory subunit of PI3K involved in modulating insulin sensitivity –foll owing ablation of KBTBD2 .

Strikingly, KBTBD2 knockdown significantly enhanced the effects of PI3K 𝛼  inhibitor alpelisib 83 —with 1μM 

alpelisib blocking growth by approximately 25%, and the addition of KBTBD2 ablation converting this effect into 

cytotoxic cell death (Fig. 5F). This effect was even more pronounced with 10μM alpelisib. To examine the effects 

on pathway output, we knocked down KBTBD2 in MCF7 cells followed by treatment with alpelisib for time t. We 

analyzed phosphorylation of PI3K effector AKT , as well as the downstream output of mTOR complex I 

(mTORC1 ), which is regulated by PI3K signaling and is a frequently activated and therapeut ically targeted 

oncogene across many cancer types 84 . As expected, suppression of mTORC1 substrate phosphorylation 

correlates with response to PI3K inhibitors 82 . When KBTBD2 was knocked down, we observed a deeper inhibition 

of mTORC1 targets, pS6 and p4EBP1 . Cyclin D1, also under mTORC1 control 85 , was also better suppressed 

when KBTBD2 expression was ablated (Fig. 5G). We also tested the mutant -selective PI3K alpha inhibitor, RLY -

2608 86 . In this case, KBTBD2 knockdown was more effective at blocking growth than the drug at any 

concentration. Additionally, the combination of RLY -2608 with KBTBD2 knockdown produced only a minor 

additive effect on growth inhibition. Interestingly, in terms of pathway inhibition, knockdown of KBTBD2 enhanced 

the inhibitory effects of RLY -2608, with pS6 , p4EBP1 , and cyclin D1 all more deeply suppressed than in the 

control siRNA cells (Fig. S6C). Taken together, these results demonstrate that KBTBD2 inhibition holds exciting 

potential to enhance the effects of PIK3CA inhibitors in PIK3CA -mutant breast cancers, warranting further 

investigation. This example illustrates how Dyscovr can link driver mutation -associated dysregulation to 

functionally relevant genetic vulnerabilities and identify interactions that may be clinically informative or even 

pharmacologically a ctionable. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

## DISCUSSION 

Cancer driver mutations reshape cellular programs far beyond the altered gene itself, propagating 

transcriptional changes across the genome that can reveal or contribute to conditional vulnerabilities in tumor 

cells. Distinguishing therapeutically actionable vulnerabilities from expression changes that reflect broader 

features of tumor development ( such as co -occurring driver alterations, widespread CNAs, or immune cell 

infiltration) remains challenging . Uncovering genes that can be co -targeted with oncogen ic drivers , many of 

which are activated rather than lost , has proven especially difficult for existing genetic interaction discovery 

approaches. 

Here, we introduced Dyscovr, a two -stage framework designed to address this gap. In the first stage, 

Dyscovr uses multiomic data from primary tumors to identify genes whose expression is systematically altered 

in association with nonsynonymous mutations in driver genes . By account ing for the diverse molecular and 

clinical factors that shape gene expression in tumors, Dyscovr is designed to distinguish expression differences 

associated with driver mutation status from those attributable to correlated featur es of the cancer context. Our 

results show that sources of variability such as cancer subtype, CNAs, DNA methylation, and immune cell 

infiltration are strong determinants of a target gene’s expression (Fig. S7A, Table S8), suggesting that attempts 

to relate mutation status to target expression wit hout accounting for these factors may lead to misleading 

conclusions in the cancer context. When applied to more than 6,000 TCGA tumors across 19 cancer types, 

Dyscovr identifies hundreds of driver -associated trans criptional changes that are reproducible across patient 

cohorts and are enriched for known and cancer -related target genes; the linear model ing framework further 

facilitates interpretab ility of individual driver -target associations. 

In the second stage, Dyscovr prioritizes these dysregulated genes using functional genetic screening 

data from cancer cell lines, distinguishing genes that become vulnerabilities in driver -muta nt contexts from genes 

whose inhibition may enhance the effect of inhibiting the driver itself. Together , these two stages nominate genes 

that are both transcriptionally perturbed in association with a mutant driver and functionally relevant for the 

viability of cells harboring that alteration . Dyscovr highlights gene s whose inhibition may either exploit a 

dependency associated with the driver mutation or provide a co -targeting strategy to enhance therapies direct ed 

at the driver , thereby nominat ing candidates for both single -agent and combinat ion treatment strategies. 

Notably, Dyscovr can uncover genetic interactions for oncogenic drivers, for which classical synthetic lethal 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

paradigms are less directly applicable. Many of the genes identified by Dyscovr as genetically interacting with 

driver genes possess targeted therapeutics in various stages of clinical development, opening possibilities for 

drug repurposing (Fig . 4D).

We experimentally validated a predicted genetic interaction between PIK3CA and KBTBD2, a gene our 

analysis implicates as a putative regulator of insulin and PI3K -AKT signaling . In PIK3CA -mutant breast cancer 

cell lines, joint inhibition of PIK3CA and KBTBD2 more effectively suppressed cell growth than PIK3CA inhibition 

or KBTBD2 knockout alone (Fig. 5). This finding illustrates how Dyscovr can nominate mechanistically 

interpretable interactions and reveal potential co -targeting strategies for oncogenic drivers. All genetic 

interactions predicted by Dyscovr are accessible via its website (dyscovr.princeton.edu), providing a resource 

for exploring putative interactions across gene s and cancer type s. 

Several directions could further expand the Dyscovr framework. Our current analysis focuses on driver 

genes mutated at sufficient frequency across available tumor cohorts; as multiomic datasets continue to grow, 

the approach can be extended to rarer driver alterations and more genetically diverse tumor types. Similarly, 

while we currently account for tumor subtype as a confounder (Table S10), larger patient cohorts would provide 

statistical power to uncover subtype -specific interactions. Incorporating addit ional molecular features, such as 

chromatin accessibility or large -scale proteomic data, could also refine predictions by directly linking mutated 

driver genes to protein -level dysregulation, a more immediate therapeutic substrate compared to RNA. Finally, 

integrating patient survival data or clinical trial results could help narrow Dyscovr’s predictions to those with the 

greatest translational promise. 

In sum , Dyscovr provides a systematic framework for linking mutations within cancer driver gene s to 

transcriptional dysregulation and conditional genetic vulnerabilities. By connecting tumor multiomic data with 

functional dependency screens, Dyscovr nominates driver -associated genetic interactions for further 

experimental and therapeutic investigation. Because driver mutation profiles are now routinely obtained in clinical 

settings, Dyscovr’s predictions have the potential to inform therapeutic prioritizati on by connecting the growing 

scale of tumor genomic profiling to experimentally testable hypotheses that could support the development of 

more effective, driver -specific treatment strategies. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Thanks to members of the Singh and Rabinowitz lab s for their insight s and comments. Thanks especially to 

Joshua Wetzel for helpful discussions regarding TCGA mutation and CNA data and for his review of the 

manuscript. The results published here are in part based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network: 

http://cance rgenome.nih.gov/, the METABRIC Consortium: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature10983 , and 

the DepMap Consortium: https://depmap.org/portal/. This work was funded in part by NIH grant R0 1-CA208148 

(to M.S.), Ludwig -Princeton AGMT DTD 1/1/2021 (to J. D. R. and M.S.) , and NSF GRFP grant DGE -2039656 (to 

S.G.). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation 

of the manuscript. Original figures created using BioRender.com. 

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

Conceptualization, S.G. and M.S. (Dyscovr), J.B., M.M., and J.D.R. (Experimental Validation); Methodology, 

S.G. and M.S.; Software, S.G. (Dyscovr), N.A. and L.P. (Dyscovr Website); Validation, S.G. (Computational), 

J.B., M.F., and R.R. (Experimental); Res ources, M.S. and J.D.R.; Writing – Original Draft, S.G.; Writing – Review 

& Editing, S.G., M.S., J.B., and J.D.R.; Visualization, S.G. and J.B.; Supervision, M.S. and J.D.R.; Project 

Administration, M.S. and J.D.R; Funding Acquisition, M.S. and J.D.R. 

## DISCLOSU RES AND COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT 

J.D.R. is a member of the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey (RCINJ) and the University of Pennsylvania 

Diabetes Research Center (U Penn DRC); a director of the U Penn DRC -Princeton inter -institutional 

metabolomics core and RCINJ metabolomics core; an advisor and stockholder in Colorado Research Partners, 

Bantam Pharmaceuticals, Barer Institute, Rafael Pharmaceuticals, Faeth Therapeutics, and Empress 

Therapeutics; a founder, director, and stockholder of Farber Partners, Raze Therapeutics, and Sofro 

Phar maceuticals; a founder, advisor, and stockholder in Marea Therapeutics and Fargo Biotechnologies; 

inventor of patents held by Princeton University; and a director of the Princeton University -PKU Shenzhen 

collaboration. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

## METHODS 

I. A Framework to Estimate Regression Coefficients for the Nonsynonymous Mutation Status of Driver Genes .

We introduce a linear regression framework to estimate relationships between the mutation status of driver genes 

and the expression of each putative target gene, t, across a set of cancer samples. In particular, for each putative 

target gene t, we consider the following model: 

𝐸 𝑡 ~ ∑ (𝛼 𝑑 𝑈 𝑑 + 𝛽 𝑑 𝐶 𝑑 + 𝛾 𝑑 𝑌 𝑑 )𝑑 ∈ 𝑆 + 𝛿 𝑈 𝑡 + 𝜁 𝐶 𝑡 + 𝜂 𝑌 𝑡 + ∑ 𝜃 𝑖 𝑋 𝑖  

> 𝐾
> 𝑖 =1

+ 𝜀 𝑡 

where S is the set of frequently mutated driver genes considered ( Table S1, Methods IV.E),  𝐸 𝑡  is a continuous 

value representing the expression of putative target gene t (Methods IV.A),  𝑈 𝑑  is a binary variable indicating 

whether driver gene d possesses a nonsynonymous mutation ( Methods IV.B),  𝐶 𝑑  is a continuous value 

representing the normalized copy number status of d (Methods IV.C), and  𝑌 𝑑  is a continuous value representing 

the methylation status of d (Methods IV.D). Similarly,  𝑈 𝑡  is a binary variable indicating whether the putative target 

gene t possesses a nonsynonymous mutation,  𝐶 𝑡  is a continuous value representing the normalized copy number 

status of t, and  𝑌 𝑡  is a continuous value representing the methylation status of t. In addition to these core features, 

we also have a number of additional covariates that correspond to various other clinical and molecular features 

that may have nontrivial effects on  𝐸 𝑡 , with the number K of such covariates dependent upon the characteristics 

of the set of samples being examined ( Methods IV.F). These covariates include the cancer type and subtype, 

age, sex , genotypic background, prior malignancies, prior treatment, nonsynonymous tumor mutational burden 

(TMB), tumor purity, and fraction of infiltrating immune cells. The coefficients fit from the data are the  𝛼 𝑑 , 𝛽 𝑑 , 𝛾 𝑑 

and  {𝜃 1, 𝜃 2, . . . , 𝜃 𝐾 }, as well as  𝛿 , 𝜁  , and  𝜂 .

II. Applying Regression Framework to Samples from the TCGA , Pan -Cancer and Within 19 Individual Cancer 

Types. We apply the multiple linear regression model to all putative target genes t in the human genome 

(Methods IV.A), with one model per t. We do this both across all TCGA samples, or “pan -cancer”, as well as 

within each of 19 individual TCGA cancer types possessing ≥75 samples (Table S1). For both the pan -cancer 

analysis and the per -cancer analyses, each model includes  𝑈 𝑑  , 𝐶 𝑑  , and  𝑌 𝑑  features for all driver genes d as 

annotated by Vogelstein et al. 27 that have nonsynonymous mutations in at least 5% of available samples and at 

least 5 total samples; see Table S1 for the set of drivers tested in each case. In the pan -cancer case, drivers 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

must be mutated in at least 5 samples, as well as at least 5% of all samples both pan -cancer and within at least 

2 individual cancer types (to ensure signal is not driven by a single cancer type) . This 5% threshold was chosen 

in an effort to balance statistical power with including as many potentially interesting driver genes as possible. 

All multiple regression models were run using the R package speedglm’s speedlm function 87 , which fit 

coefficients by minimizing the residual sum of squares and provided associated p-values for all terms, including 

the  𝑈 𝑑  mutational terms of interest. For all tests, p-values are two -sided and correspond to the F-statistic , which 

is calculated according to the null hypothesis that a given coefficient is zero. For each driver gene, we performed 

multiple hypothesis correction across the set of coefficients corresponding to its mutational term to convert p-

values across the targets to q-values, using the qvalue function from the qvalue package in R with default 

parameters 88 . We deemed pairings between a nonsynonymous mutation in driver gene d and the expression of 

putative target gene t significant if the corresponding q-value was less than a threshold value of 0.2; given the 

increased statistical power in the pan -cancer setting, in the main body of the paper, we report pairings that are 

significant using a threshold of 0.01 for pan -cancer analyses and 0.2 for per -cancer analyses. 

III. Addressing Multicollinearity . In certain cases, we expect the nonsynonymous mutation status of driver gene 

d, represented as  𝑈 𝑑 , to result in correlations with other variables in our framework (e.g., mutations within IDH1 

promote hypermethylation 89 , and thus IDH1 mutation status in some cancers may be correlated with the 

methylation status of genes). In such cases , we will not be able to disentangle the contributions of the mutation 

within the driver gene from other variables it is correlated with. As such, prior to running the regression, our 

framework checks for multicollinearity. 

First, we check that cancer subtype covariates ( Methods IV.F.h) are not correlated with the mutation 

status of any driver genes present in the given regression model. If they are, this would indicate that these 

subtypes were at least partially defined by driver mutation status. To address this, we generate a S pearman 

correlation coefficient matrix and associated p-value matrix using the R package Hmisc, and check, for each 

cancer subtype variable, if it is correlated with any  𝑈 𝑑  variable with an absolute Spearman correlation >0.7 and 

p-value <1E -05. If this correlation meets both of these exclusion criteria, the subtype variable is removed from 

the regression model. We use Spearman correlation for subtype variables, rather than other commonly used 

measures of multicollinearity such as t he variance inflation factor (VIF) 90 , because subtypes are encoded as 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

bucketed, binary variables ( Methods IV.F.h), and thus the corresponding variables are correlated with each other 

and will have high variance inflation factors (VIFs), even if they are not correlated with the mutation status of the 

driver gene. Across targets, we find that the vast majority of variables removed using this procedure pan -cancer 

(~99.9%) correspond to subtypes that are defined by IDH1 -mutation status in LGG, particularly the IDH1mut -

non -codel subtype. 

Following this, we check other variables in the model for multicollinearity using the VIF. We use the R 

package caret’s vif function to calculate a VIF measure for all non -bucketed variables in the regression, since as 

described above, bucketed variables ( Methods IV.F.f -i) by design are collinear with one another and have high 

VIF scores. For the remainder of these variables, we eliminate any non -driver mutation (  𝑈 𝑑 ) variables whose 

VIF score exceeds a threshold of 5, a generally conservative but widely accepted threshold that suggests 

moderate collinearity 39 . To ensure that our variables of interest,  𝑈 𝑑 , are not collinear with other variables in the 

model, we repeat this process iteratively until  𝑈 𝑑  for all d in S are below the threshold VIF of 5. In pan -cancer 

analyses, 13,917 genes (84.6%) had at least one variable removed, though 13,384 of these genes (96.2% of 

the 13,917 cases, 81.3% of target genes overall) had only the IDH1mut -non -codel subtype variable remov ed. 

Aside from this, we find that the methylation status of the target gene is most commonly eliminated pan -cancer 

(for ~2.10% of tested genes), followed by sex (~1.51%). For all significant pairings, variables that were eliminated 

using either of the above techniques are reported in Data S3 and Fig. S7B .

IV. Data Acquisition and Processing . In the National Cancer Institute’s GDC data portal, there are 6378 primary 

tumor samples that possess all data types of interest, including annotated somatic mutation data, transcriptomic 

profiling, copy number variation, methylation, and clinical data. We downloaded these files from the GDC data 

repository, with parameters provided in Table S 9.

A.  Expression Data . Raw read count RNA -seq files from the TCGA were converted to counts per million 

(CPM) using edgeR’s cpm function 91 . Genes minimally expressed across all samples were eliminated 

using edgeR’s filterByExpr function with default parameters. These include requirements that all genes 

are required to have a minimum overall total count of at least 15 ( min.total.count ), and a minimum CPM 

of 10 in at least 10 samples ( min.count ). The remaining 19,052 genes’ counts were quantile normalized 

so that each of the 6378 samples has the same distribution of gene expression values using scikit learn’s 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

quantile.transform function 92 , with an output distribution of ‘normal.’ Each gene t’s expression level in 

Dyscovr corresponds to a quantile -normalized gene expression value  𝐸 𝑡 . For randomization analyses, 

each genes’ quantile -normalized expression values were shuffled across patients using the R function 

dqsample .

B.  Mutation Data . We imported the simple nucleotide variation (SNV) file, with mutations called using 

muse 93 , into R using maftools’ read.maf function 94 . We then subsetted this file to include only 

nonsynonymous mutations (as annotated by muse ), including missense, nonsense, nonstop, and splice 

site mutations. We then used maftools’ mutCountMatrix function to compute the number of 

nonsynonymous mutations per gene and per sample. We excluded samples with excessively high 

mutation rates across all genes, referred to here as ‘hypermutators’, which we defined according to the 

analyses performed in Campb ell et al. 95 . In this work, they used a linear regression approach across 

81,337 cancer patients to determine a reasonable threshold for hypermutation, which they recommend 

being ~10 mutations per Mb. Given that the human exome is ~36.8Mb, we selected 368 mutations as 

our threshold for hypermutation, such that any sample with greater than 368 total nonsynonymous 

mutations was discarded from the analysis. This removed a total of 36 0 samples, leaving 6018 pan -

cancer TCGA samples. The mutation status of each gene t in ea ch sample,  𝑈 𝑡 , is 1 if the gene has a 

nonsynonymous mutation in that sample and 0 otherwise. 

a.  Restricting to Hotspot or Nonsense Mutations . In some analyses , we restricted only to mutations 

that we expect to have high impact in terms of effect on protein function. For oncogenes PIK3CA ,

KRAS , and IDH1 , we used literature -curated “hotspot” mutation residues . For PIK3CA , these 

include E542, E545, H1047 and H1047 96 . For KRAS , these include G12, G13, and Q61 97 . For 

IDH1 , this includes R132 98 . For tumor suppressor gene TP53 , we used all missense mutations 

with at least one line of evidence in Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer 99 and all nonsense 

variants (collectively 36.1 % of TP53 mutations). For analyses using these restricted mutation sets, 

we excluded patients with mutations in these drivers that lie only in non -hotspot positions. 

C.  Copy Number Alteration (CNA) Data . We obtained absolute CNA values for each gene in each sample, 

as computed by the ASCAT 100 pipeline and made available by TCGA. In our model, for each gene in a 

given sample, we compute its normalized copy number value as the log 2 of the absolute CNA value 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

divided by the mean CNA value across genes in the sample. Pseudocounts of 1 were used to adjust both 

the gene -level and average copy number values. The normalized copy number gives us a value that 

accounts for large scale ploidy differences between tumor s amples. In practice, to be robust to extreme 

outlier CNA events, we exclude the top 10% and bottom 10% of gene -level CNA values for each sample 

when calculating its mean CNA value. 

D.  Methylation Data . We imported individual samples’ level 3 Liftover methylation Beta (β) files into R and 

removed ‘NA’ or empty values. These files have already been processed to include gene -level 

annotations. For any gene with more than one reported β value, we averaged th ese β values to produce 

a single β value per gene. Subsequently, we compiled the average β value for each gene in each sample 

and then converted β values to M-values using the logit, or  𝑙𝑜𝑔 2(𝛽 / 1 − 𝛽 )). We represent methylation 

levels in our model using these M-values. We use the M-value rather than the β value to assess 

methylation due to its purported statistical rigor 101 and improved model performance in early testing. 

E.  Gene Set Data . Our list of driver genes consists of genes from Vogelstein et al. tables S2A, S2B, S3A, 

S3B, S3C and S4 27 .

F.  Clinical Data . Using data from the TCGA’s clinical supplement, we created a composite data table with 

patient -level features. Using data from TCGA’s biosample data supplement, a TCGA tumor purity file 

obtained from Aran et al. 102 , genotypic principal components from Carrot -Zhang et al. 103 , and immune cell 

infiltration estimates from R’s immunedeconv package 104 using the tool CIBERSORT Abs 105 , we created 

a data table with sample -level features. We then combined the patient - and sample -specific files such 

that all patient -specific data was applied to all samples from that patient, for use in the linear regression 

framework. Further information on each clinical feature is described in subsections below. 

a.  Age. Normalized to take on a value approximately between 0 and 1 by dividing each patient’s age 

(given in years) by 100. 

b.  Sex . Takes on a binary value of 1 for male and 0 for female patients. 

c.  Prior malignancies. Takes on binary value, with 1 signifying that the patient had a prior malignancy 

and 0 signifying that there was no prior malignancy. 

d.  Prior treatment. Encompasses two binary variables, as per the data available in the TCGA’s 

clinical supplement: prior radiation treatment, where 0 represents no prior radiation treatment and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

1 represents prior radiation treatment, and prior pharmaceutical treatment, where 0 represents no 

prior pharmaceutical treatment and 1 represents prior pharmaceutical treatment. 

e.  Genotypic Principal Components . Consists of three continuous covariates, each of which 

corresponds to the value of one of the first three genotypic principal components (PCs). These 

PCs are provided in the supplemental data table of Carrot -Zhang et al. 103 

(https://gdc.cancer.gov/about -data/publications/CCG -AIM -2020 ,

“WashU_PCA_ethnicity_assigned.tsv” ) and were calculated using the Washington University 

approach. Briefly, this approach involves the conversion of Birdseed genotype files to individual 

VCF files, which are then merged (with only variants of MAF >15% retained) prior to PCA using 

PLINK 1.9. 106 See Carrot -Zhang et al. 103 for more detailed methods. 

f.  Nonsynonymous Mutational Burden. Consists of three binary covariates, representing low, 

moderate, and high nonsynonymous tumor mutational burden (TMB). For any given sample, one 

of these covariates will take on a value of 1 and the other two a value of 0, depending on the total 

number of nonsynonymous mutations their tumor possesses. Based on the distribution of TMB 

across TCGA samples, we defined low TMB as having <30 nonsynonymous mutations, moderate 

TMB as between 30 and 60 mutations, and high TMB as >60 mutations. 

g.  Tumor Purity. Consists of three binary covariates, representing low, moderate, and high tumor 

purity. For any given sample, one of these covariates will take on a value of 1 and the other two 

a value of 0, depending on the magnitude of the tumor purity estimate for tha t sample. We define 

purity using the combined purity estimate (CPE) from Aran et al. 102 when available, and for the 

samples without a provided CPE, we use the median of the available purity measures. Based on 

the distribution of CPE values across TCGA samples, we defined low tumor purity as having a 

CPE ≤ 0.5, moderate tumor purity as having a 0.5 < CPE ≤ 0.75, and high tumor purity as having 

a CPE > 0.75. 

h.  Tumor Subtype . Consists of a binary covariate for each subtype in the given cancer type. For any 

given sample, one of these covariates will take on a value of 1 and all others a value of 0, 

depending on which subtype it is classified as. Because subtypes are defined diff erently for each 

cancer type, the column we used to define subtype in the TCGA clinical supplement is provided 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

in Table S 10 . Each cancer type will have a different number of tumor subtype variables, as this is 

dependent on the number of unique subtypes present in the given column. Molecular subtypes 

were used whenever possible; when unavailable, histological or expression -base d clustering 

subtypes were used. In the pan -cancer analyses, a binary covariate was created for each cancer 

type:subtype combination (e.g. Breast Cancer:Luminal A), across all cancer types. In this case, 

for any given sample, one of these combi nation covariates will take on a value of 1 and all others 

0, depending on its combined cancer type and subtype classification. 

i.  Immune Cell Infiltration . In the case of immune cell infiltration, we use the absolute immune cell 

fractions provided by the tool CIBERSORT Abs 105 , run using R’s immunedeconv package 104 . To 

get a single value representing the level of immune cell infiltration in the given sample, we add 

individual immune cell type fractions, e.g. predicted fractions of B cells, T cells, etc., into a total 

fraction of immune cells per sample. From there, we group this fraction into one of three buckets: 

low immune cell infiltration (total immune cell fraction ≤0.3), medium immune cell infiltration (total 

immune cell fraction >0.3 and ≤0.7), and high immune cell infiltration (total immune cell fraction 

>0.7 ), again defined by the distribution of total immune cell fractions across the samples. 

G.  In all of the cases that involve two or more binary covariates, and in which only one of these covariates 

can take on a value of 1 ( Method s I VFf -i), one fewer covariate is needed in the linear regression equation 

to represent all distinct possible classifications 107 . To limit multicollinearity, the final covariate for a given 

feature is removed ( i.e . a dummy variable encoding, rather than a one -hot encoding). For example, in 

the case of nonsynonymous TMB, low TMB would be represented by a binary covariate taking on values 

of 1 and 0, moderate TMB would be represented by a binary covariate taking on v alues of 0 and 1, and 

high TMB would be represented by two binary covariates taking on values of 0 and 0. 

V. Benchmarking of Dyscovr Against muTarget and xseq . We sought to benchmark Dyscovr’s performance in 

recovering transcriptional targets of driver genes as compared to muTarget 13 and xseq 5. In the case of muTarget 

and xseq , we performed benchmarking in a pan -cancer context and, for muTarget, used our preprocessed TCGA 

patient data as input (Methods IV). Each implementation is described in more detail below :

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

A.  muTarget (Mann -Whitney U). Though muTarget did not provide unfiltered , download able results or 

associated source code, we re -implemented the underlying method using the wilcox.test function in R

(with exact set to False ), which performs the Wilcoxon rank -sum test (equivalent to the MWU). For each 

of TP53 , PIK3CA , KRAS , and IDH1 , we compared the expression of a given target gene between patient 

populations possessing a nonsynonymous mutation in that driver to those without, retrieving an 

associated U-statistic and p-value. We performed this test across all genes considered in the Dyscovr 

model, for a total of 16 ,458 tests. Given the high level of resulting p-value skew (Fig. S2 A), q-value 

adjustment (which relies on a n expected underlying p-value distribution) was not possible. Therefore, we 

adjusted p-values using a Benjamini -Hoc hberg correction. We ranked genes by p-value to examine 

overlap with Dyscovr’s hits, compare driver -target ranks, and perform gene set enrichment analysis 

(Methods VII). 

B.  xseq. We cloned the xseq v0.2.2 GitHub repository (https://github.com/shahcompbio/xseq ) and 

downloaded the recommended influence graph (http://compbio -

bccrc.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2015/05/influence_graph.txt ), limit ing it to connection strength greater than or 

equal to 0.4 as suggested . From there, we followed the provided vignette 

(https://rdrr.io/cran/xseq/f/vignettes/xseq -package.Rmd ). Briefly, this involved converting our mutation, 

CNA , and expression files from the TCGA (Methods IV.A -C) into xseq forma t using the provided helper 

functions; imputing NA values in each matrix using K -nearest neighbor averaging , as suggested ;

obtaining the conditional distributions across genes; limiting to expressed genes using the recommended 

weight threshold of 0.9; setting model parameter priors; initiating the xseq model and learning the 

associated parameters; and converting the output i nto readable format. For the trans version of the xseq 

model, which is most comparable to Dyscovr, we followed the recommended protocol to remove cis -

effects of CNAs on gene expression using the NormExpr func tion, and then ran SetXseqPrior and 

InitXseqModel with cis set to False. As output, we obtained combinations of drivers and target genes with 

an associated P(D) value, which corresponds to the conditional probability that a mutation in the given 

driver is associated with a change in expression in the given target gene. We used this descending 

probability for ranking our driver -target pairs. Given that only genes affiliated with a given driver in the 

provided influence graph possessed an associated P(D) valu e using this method (932 for TP53 , 422 for 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

PIK3CA , 213 for KRAS , and 54 for IDH1 ), we subsetted Dyscovr and muTarget’s output to the same 

genes for all subsequent enrichment tests. 

VI. Computational Validation via Comparison of TCGA BRCA results to METABRIC . To test whether our models 

are capable of generating consistent and meaningful correlations between driver gene mutations and target gene 

expression across independent cohorts, we also applied the Dyscovr framework to data from the Molecular 

Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) 42 , a collection of 854 breast cancer patients 

of European ancestry with paired mutation, CNA, mRNA expression, methylation, and clinical data. Due to 

differences in available data types, we made the following modifications to our model and data processing. 

A.  METABRIC: Estimating Regression Coefficient for Mutation Status of Driver Genes. To ensure 

comparability to TCGA -BRCA, linear regression models were constructed in the same fashion as 

described in Methods I. Due to limitations in available ge rmline data for the METABRIC cohort, genotypic 

principal components are not included in these models. 

B.  METABRIC: Data Acquisition and Processing. METABRIC primary tumor data files were downloaded 

from cBioPortal 108 . To keep processing pipelines as similar as possible to TCGA -BRCA, the same 

protocol was used for preprocessing mutation data, including generation of a mutation count, restriction 

to only nonsynonymous mutations, and removal of hypermutators (Methods IV.B). Mutations in 

METABRIC were called using MuTect and filtered according to the procedure given in Curtis et al. 42 . As 

with TCGA -BRCA, ASCAT 100 was used for CNA calling. The gene expression data available for the 

METABRIC cohort is Illumina HT -12 v3 microarray data, which requires distinct preprocessing 

procedures to TCGA -BRCA’s RNA -sequencing data. We filtered genes with greater than 50% missing 

values and with mean expression <5 or standard deviation <0.3 across samples, as in Liao et al. 109 , but 

otherwise used the provided quantile -normalized log2 -intensity values as input to our models. The 

METABRIC methylation data is also distinct from TCGA -BRCA in that only promoter methylation bisulfite 

sequencing (RRBS) is available. Files were already processed using the gpatterns package such that 

each file contains a [0,1] gene -level value of CpG methylation. Models were run using both these [0,1] 

CpG values, as well as the logit of these values, though models performed comparably and the [0,1] CpG 

values were ultimately used in figure creation. Due to differences in labeling and availability of clinical 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

data types in METABRIC as compared to TCGA -BRCA, different column names were often used; any 

features with notable differences are described below. 

a.  Prior malignancies ( Methods IV.F.c) . The “RFS_STATUS” column was used. 

b.  Prior treatment ( Methods IV.F.d). The “RADIO_THERAPY” column was used to create a binary 

representation of prior radiation treatment, while the “CHEMOTHERAPY” and 

“HORMONE_THERAPY” columns were combined to create a binary representation of prior 

pharmaceutical treatment. In the latter cas e, the sample received a 1 if they had received either 

chemotherapy or hormone therapy, and 0 otherwise. 

c.  Nonsynonymous tumor mutational burden (TMB) ( Methods IV.F.f). For the nonsynonymous TMB, 

the log2 of the “TMB_NONSYNONYMOUS” column with a pseudocount of 1 was used, with 3 

binary covariates for representing low (TMB ≤ 2.5), moderate (2.5 < TMB ≤ 3.5) and high (TMB > 

3.5) tumor mutational burden. 

d.  Tumor purity ( Methods IV.F.g ). METABRIC’s clinical supplement provides a “CELLULARITY” 

column that is an estimate of tumor purity from the tool MCP -counter 110 . The values this column 

can take include “Low”, “Moderate”, and “High”. As with TCGA -BRCA, we represented this in our 

model as three binary covariates, with a sample taking on a value of 1 in one of these covariates 

and a 0 in the two others. 

C.  METABRIC: Comparison of Betas to TCGA -BRCA. For each driver gene mutated at ≥5% frequency in 

both TCGA -BRCA and METABRIC cohorts, which includes TP53 and PIK3CA , we computed the 

Spearman correlation between the fit coefficients for all target genes tested in both TCGA -BRCA and 

METABRIC (Fig. 3 B, Fig. S5C ). 

VII . Gene Set Enrichment Analysis .

We compute enrichment in curated gene sets (Fig. 2B-D; Table S3 ) using a preranked, one -sided gene 

set enrichment test with the fgsea package’s fgseaMultilevel function 111 , which uses a multilevel splitting Monte 

Carlo approach and provides an enrichment score, normalized enrichment score, and p-value for each gene set. 

We use gene sets from the DoRothEA network 28 (Fig. 2B), a curated set of TP53 targets from Fischer et al. 29 

(Table 1, Fig. 2C) and Reactome 41 (Fig. 2C), and from the CGC 33 (Fig. 2D). The DoRothEA network was 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

accessed via the dorothea R package using the dorothea_hs function. Only high confidence genes (levels A -C) 

were used, as has been done in previous work. Additional gene sets used for TP53 -specific gene set enrichment 

analysis were downloaded directly from TRRUST 30 , hTFtarget 31 , and KEGG 32 websites (Table S3). 

We compute pathway -level gene set enrichment analysis ( Fig. S1C; Data S2) using the package 

ReactomePA 112 in R, specifically using the gseGO, gseKEGG, and gseMKEGG functions applied to the -log (q-

values) multiplied by the directionality of the associated mutation coefficient (1 for coefficient > 0, -1 for coefficient 

< 0) produced by Dyscovr. In cases with more than five significant GO pathways, functionally similar GO 

pathways 34 were consolidated using the Wang et al. method 113 ; pathways with a similarity metric greater than 

0.7 were merged, retaining the name of the more statistically significant pathway (Fig . S1 C). Full sets of enriched 

GO pathways, without merging, can be found in Data S2.

VIII. Identification of Genetic Interactions Using the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap) 26 . We use a combination 

of CRISPRi gene dependency data, mutation data, and gene expression data from DepMap public v.23Q2 to 

narrow down putative candidates from phase I of Dyscovr to those that are potentially involved in a genetic 

interaction with the corresponding driver gene. For a given cancer driver gene d, we first limit d’s transc riptional 

hits to most confident hits, i.e. those that are statistically significant both pan -cancer ( q < 0. 2) and within at least 

one individual cancer type ( q < 0.2). For each of these remaining targets t in set T, we use the following 

regression framework to relate the cell viability upon CRISPR knock out of t (𝑉 𝑡 ) to the mutation status ( 𝑈 𝑑 ) and 

expression ( 𝐸 𝑑 ) of d across a set K of cancer types (𝑋 𝑖 ) (see Methods VIII.A.d): 

𝑉 𝑡 ~ 𝛼 𝑈 𝑑 + 𝛽 𝐸 𝑑 + ∑ 𝛾 𝑖 𝑋 𝑖 

> 𝐾
> 𝑖 =1

+ 𝜀 𝑡 

Overall, |T | regression models are fit for a given d. For both oncogenes and tumor suppressors, mutation status 

and expression provide complementary but non -equivalent measures of driver state, because activating or 

disruptive mutations can have downstream consequences that differ from those produced by incre ased or 

reduced expression. Thus, to uncover genetic interactions for driver gene d, we evaluate the significance of the 

combined effect of  𝑈 𝑑  and  𝐸 𝑑  on  𝑉 𝑡  using Empirical Brown’s method ( i.e. the empiricalBrownsMethod function 

from the EmpiricalBrownsMethod R package with default parameters ). This method is an adaptation of Fisher's 

method 114 that allows for term interdependency. With this approach, we obtain a single p-value for each potential 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

genetic interaction considered . We obtain multiple hypothesis corrected q-values from these p-values using the 

qvalue function from the qvalue package in R with default parameters 88 .

For each driver gene d, we further classify which of its genetic interactions correspond to conditional 

genetic vulnerabilities with potential therapeutic relevance . In the case of an oncogene ( KRAS and PIK3CA ), we 

expect activating nonsynonymous mutation or high expression to result in cancer -promoting overactivity . T hus ,

promising co -targeting vulnerability candidates (i.e., cases where joint inhibition of the driver and the predicted 

interactor reduce s cell viability ) would display a positive relations hip between activity of d and cell viability upon 

knockout of t (𝛼  > 0,  𝛽  > 0) (Fig. 4A) . Conversely, a promising acquired vulnerability candidate (i.e., cases where 

inhibition of the predicted interactor reduces cell viability in the context of a mutant driver ) would display a 

negative relationship between the activity of d and cell viability upon knockout of t (𝛼  < 0,  𝛽  < 0). For tumor 

suppressor genes ( TP53 ), we search only for acquired vulnerabilities , as cancer -relevant nonsynonymous 

mutations in tumor suppressors impair their tumor -suppressor activity (and thus, further inhibiting an already 

impaired tumor suppressor in combination with the target gene would not represent a plausible therapeutic 

strategy). In this case, we expect a negative relationship between the mutation status of d and cell viability upon 

knockout of t, but a positive relationship between the expression of d and cell viability upon knockout of t (𝛼  < 0, 

𝛽  > 0). We define oncogenes and tumor suppressors using the standard Vogelstein definitions 27 . We report the 

set of targets t for which the combined q-value is less than 0.2 and the coefficients  𝛼  and  𝛽  from the pre -

recombined analysis align with the above schema (Table S4) . We note that for TP53 and tumor suppressors 

more generally , 𝛼  > 0 , 𝛽  < 0 corresponds to interactions in which greater tumor suppressor activity is associated 

with greater sensitivity to target loss (i.e. in which the presence of functional TP53 increases dependency on the 

interacting gene); this case does not correspond to a plausible therapeutic strategy for TP53 -mutant tumors. 

Combinations of  𝛼  and  𝛽  other than those listed above indicate discordant associations of driver mutation status 

and expression with sensitivity to target loss. These patterns may reflect biologically distinct consequences of 

driver mutation and altered driver expression on sens itivity to target loss, and are therefore not assigned to either 

conditional -vulnerability class. 

A.  DepMap: Data Acquisition and Processing. CRISPR dependency, mutation, gene expression, and cell 

line metadata for cancer cell lines were downloaded from the DepMap online portal 

(https://depmap.org/portal/ ). Models were run using the 693 cancer cell lines with all data types available 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

and the set of 3 TCGA pan -cancer drivers (TP53, PIK3CA, and KRAS ) that have nonsynonymous 

mutations in at least 15 cell lines across cell lines in the set of cancer types in which that driver is 

recurrently mutated (Table S1) .

a.  CRISPR Dependency Data . Each target gene t’s dependency score upon genetic interference 

corresponds to the CRISPR dependency value  𝑉 𝑡 . Dependency scores were processed using 

Chronos 115 . Positive dependency values indicate increased cell viability upon knockout, while 

negative dependency values indicate reduced cell viability upon knockout. 

b.  Expression Data . log2( TPM + 1) -normalized RNA -seq files from DepMap were quantile 

normalized so that each of the cell lines has the same distribution of gene expression values using 

scikit learn’s quantile.transform function 92 , with an output distribution of ‘normal.’ Each driver gene 

d’s expression level corresponds to a quantile -normalized gene expression value  𝐸 𝑑 .

c.  Mutation Data . The DepMap mutation file was subsetted to include only nonsynonymous 

mutations, selecting for ‘VariantInfo’ column annotations that include ‘MISSENSE’, ‘NONSENSE’, 

‘NONSTOP’, and ‘SPLICE_SITE’. The mutation status of each driver gene d in each sample,  𝑈 𝑑 ,

is 1 if the driver gene has a nonsynonymous mutation in that sample and 0 otherwise. 

d.  Cancer Type . Consists of a binary covariate for each cancer type. For any given cell line, one of 

these covariates will take on a value of 1 and all others a value of 0, depending on which cancer 

type it is classified as in the cell line metadata supplement column ‘pri mary_disease’. Cell line 

data from a given cancer type is only considered if d is mutated in at least 5% of samples from 

that cancer type in the TCGA cohort (Table S1) .

B.  Assessment of Enrichment of Gold -Standard Genetic Interactions . To validate Dyscovr’s predicted 

genetic interactors, we sought experimentally derived sources of genetic interactions with TP53 , PIK3CA ,

and KRAS . For each of TP53 , PIK3CA , and KRAS , we retrieved all genes from BioGRID 45 v5.0.253 

denoted as being involved in a genetic interaction with the given driver, considering any gene that met at 

least one of the listed classification codes for genetic interactions given in 

https://wiki.thebiogrid.org/doku.php/experimental_systems. This yielded a total of 423 genes for TP53 

(2 28 overlapping with our set of genes tested for genetic interactions ), 52 genes for PIK3CA (45 

overlapping), and 1941 genes for KRAS (1748 overlapping ). Though Dyscovr predicted genetic 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

interactors display strong enrichment in these genes on their own (one -sided GSEA, TP53 NES = 1.3 3,

p = 2. 57 E-04; PIK3CA NES = 1.3 3, p = 1.6E -01; KRAS NES = 1.16, p = 7.09E -02), we further 

supplemented our gene set with genetic interactors from literature sources specific to our drivers of 

interest (Table S5). For our final gene set, we took the total unique set of genes supported by any of the 

above sources, yielding a total of 946 genes for TP53 (856 overlapping with our tested set), 213 genes 

for PIK3CA (195 overlapping), and 5166 genes for KRAS (4576 overlapping). All enrichment tests were 

performed using fgsea, as in Methods VII. 

We did not further restrict th is reference set to test specifically for enrichment amongst Dyscovr’s 

predicted conditional genetic interactions . While BioG RID further categorizes genetic interactions into 

various types of positive and negative genetic interactions, these classifications do not capture the driver 

context in which the interaction was measured. The underlying studies include those designed to identify 

interactions between wild -type drivers and target genes (e.g. high -throughput CRISPR knock out or 

shRNA screens such as Diehl et al. 116 ); those focused specifically on interactions with mutant copies of 

a given driver (e.g. Xie et al. 117 ); those that test both wild -type and mutant contexts (e.g. Lü et al .118 ); and 

those focused on drug -dependent interactions (e.g. Liu et al. 119 ). Consequently, the reported interactions 

could not be consistently classified as acquired or co -targeting vulnerabilities. 

We instead perform a separate validation using the SynLethDB v2.0 database 46 , which 

catalogues SL interactions in cancer , the most -studied form of conditional genetic vulnerability. For each 

driver gene ( TP53, PIK3CA , and KRAS ), we retrieved all SL partners listed in SynLethDB. Because 

SynLethDB does not consistently annotate the molecular context in which each interaction was observed 

(e.g., mutant versus wild -type driver background), we mapped SynLethDB entries to the Dyscovr 

interaction classes that most closely correspond to the experimental designs represented in the 

database. For TP53 , we considered both predicted acquired vulnerabilities (dependencies associated 

with TP53 loss) and predicted interactions in which higher TP53 activity was associated with increased 

sensitivity to target loss, reflecting SL relationships that arise in TP53 -wild -type contexts. For the 

oncogenes PIK3CA and KRAS , we restricted analysis to Dyscovr’s predicted co -targeting vulnerabilities, 

corresponding to interactions involving simultaneous perturbation of the driver and the partner gene. To 

evaluate whether Dyscovr recapitulates SL relationships catalogued in SynLethDB, we performed gene 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

set enrichment analysis using the ranked lists of Dyscovr interaction scores for each driver. Enrichment 

was assessed separately for two SynLethDB -derived gene sets: (i) SL interactions supported by 

experimental evidence or literature text mining, and (ii) SL interactions predicted by computational 

methods curated in SynLethDB. Enrichment tests were performed using the fgsea package as described 

above (Methods VII), using one -sided tests to assess whether SynLethDB SL partners were enriched 

among higher -ran ked Dyscovr predictions. Only genes present in the Dyscovr -tested gene universe for 

each driver were included in the enrichment analysis. 

C.  Identification of Overlap Between Predicted Genetic Interactors and Known Drug Targets. To identify 

predicted genetic interactors with existing drugs that target them, we retrieved an exhaustive set of gene -

drug links from Santos et al. Supplemental Data S2 74 . We restricted this table to links involving Homo 

sapiens and extracted any entries where our predictions ( q < 0.2) had at least one listed drug (Table S6). 

Genes were denoted as inhibitors/ antagonists via manual curation from the DrugBank database 120 .

D.  Evaluation of Candidate Genetic Interactions via Correlation to Drug Sensitivity. For putative genetic 

interaction target t of clinical interest (i.e. KBTBD2 ), we further used DepMap’s repository of drug 

sensitivity data to compute a Spearman’s correlation between the viability of the cell line upon CRISPR 

interference of t (𝑉 𝑡 ) and the sensitivity to each of 4659 drugs. Associated p-values were corrected using 

the qvalue package in R with default parameters 88 . Significant correlation to sensitivity of drugs ( q < 0.2) 

were used to infer potential mechanisms -of -action of t.

IX. Survival Analysis for PIK3CA Mutation and KBTBD2 Expression . To evaluate whether the expression level 

of putative target gene KBTBD2 (𝐸 𝐾 ) has an effect on patient survival ( 𝑆 ), taking into consideration the binary 

nonsynonymous mutation status of cancer driver gene PIK3CA (𝑈 𝑃 ), we used the following Cox proportional 

hazards model: 

𝑆 ~ 𝛼𝐸 𝐾 + 𝛽𝑈 𝑃 + ∑ 𝛾 𝑖 𝑋 𝑖 

> 𝐾
> 𝑖 =1

As in the main Dyscovr framework, we also have a number of additional covariates that correspond to various 

other clinical and molecular features that may have nontrivial effects on  𝑆 , with the number K of such covariates 

dependent upon the characteristics of the set of samples being examined ( i.e. pan -cancer or breast cancer, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Methods IV.F). These covariates include the cancer type and subtype, age, sex , genotypic background, prior 

malignancies, prior treatment, nonsynonymous tumor mutational burden (TMB), tumor purity, and fraction of 

infiltrating immune cells. This model was fit using the coxph function in the survminer package in R version 

0.4.9 121 with default parameters. Hazard ratio estimates were computed as  𝑒 𝛼 , where  𝛼  is the fit coefficient for 

the  𝐸 𝐾  term (above). 

A.  Data Acquisition and Representation . Survival, mutation, and gene expression data were obtained for all 

785 pan -cancer patients (see Methods IV.A and IV.B for details about mutation and gene expression 

data acquisition and preprocessing) from the National Cancer Institute’s GDC Data Portal with reported 

information about survival status and days until death or last follow -up (see Methods IX.A.a) and have 

high or low KBTBD2 expression (see Methods IX.A.c) .

a.  Survival Data. Survival data was extracted from the TCGA clinical supplement, including (a) 

binary survival status (alive or dead), and (b) time in days, defined as time until death if patient 

has died, or time until last follow -up if patient is alive. Survival  𝑆  was represented as a Surv object 

from the survminer package for modeling. 

b.  Mutation Data . The mutation status of PIK3CA in each patient,  𝑈 𝑃 , is 1 if PIK3CA has a 

nonsynonymous mutation in that patients’ sample and 0 otherwise. 

c.  Expression Data . The quantile -normalized expression matrix was further z-score normalized per 

patient column, such that the resulting matrix took on a mean ( 𝜇 ) of ~0 and a standard deviation 

(𝜎 ) of ~1. This formulation allowed us to select patients whose normalized expression value for 

KBTBD2 is less than  𝜇 − 𝜎  (which we define as having “low” expression) or is greater than  𝜇 +

𝜎  (which we define as having “high” expression). Patients who do not fall into either of these 

categories are excluded from further analysis. In the Cox proportional hazards model, the 

expression status of KBTBD2 in each patient,  𝐸 𝐾 , is 1 if the patient has “high” KBTBD2 expression 

and 0 if the patient has “low” KBTBD2 expression, as previously defined. 

B.  Survival Visualization. Adjusted patient survival curves were visualized using the ggadjustedcurves 

function from the survminer package using the default ‘single’ (average for population) approach 121 .

Briefly, this approach displays expected survival curves calculated based on the Cox model fit. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

X. Cell Lines . MCF7 (HTB -22) was purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and maintained 

in DMEM supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. MCF7 cells 

possess an E545K hotspot PIK3CA mutation. 

XI. Immunoblotting . Cells were collected in ice cold PBS and lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Pierce #89901) 

supplemented with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce Chemical). Lysates were centrifuged at 

20,000 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected , and protein concentration was determined using 

the BCA kit (Pierce) per manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of protein (20μg) in cell lysates were 

separated by SDS –PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE healthcare), im munoblotted with specific 

primary and secondary antibodies and detected by chemiluminescence with the ECL detection reagents from 

Thermo Fisher or Millipore. 

XII. Antibodies. pAKT S473 (Cell Signaling Technology (CST) 4060), pS6 S235/S236 (CST 4858), p4EBP1 S65 

(CST 9451), Cyclin D1 (CST 55506), p85 alpha (CST 4292), Beta Actin (CST 4967). Secondary Goat anti -Rabbit 

IgG (H+L) Secondary Antibody HRP (Thermo Fisher 65 -6120). 

XIII. siRNA Knockdown. Cells were transfected for 48hr with Dharmacon SMARTpool nontargeting or siRNA 

designed against human KBTBD2. Transfection was aided by preincubation of siRNA with lipofectamine 

RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and used according to the manufacturer’s i nstructions. 

XIV. mRNA extraction and RT -qPCR. mRNA was isolated using RNeasy kit (Qiagen) with Qiaschredder and 

eluted in 50uL. cDNA was synthesized using SuperScript First -Strand Synthesis System for RT -PCR kit 

(ThermoFisher #11904018). Synthesis was performed using random primers. Probes and primer s were 

obtained from ThermoFisher as follows: KBTBD2 (Assay ID: Hs01556149_m1, FAM -MGB and GAPDH (Assay 

ID: Hs02786624_g1, VIC -MGB). qPCR was performed in 20uL reaction volumes with KBTBD2 assay together 

with GAPDH and ampl ified using iTaq universal probes supermix (Bio -Rad Laboratories, #1725134). Relative 

quantification was performed using (2 –ΔΔCt). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

XV. Quantification of Cell Growth and Viability . MCF7 cells were seeded into 24 -well plates at 50,000 cells per 

well and transfected as indicated above. Cell growth was quantified using the sulforhodamine B assay. For 

each condition at least 3 replicates were measured. Growth at day 0 was subtracted fr om all Day 4 values and 

growth was normalized to Veh. treated samples. 

## Resource Availability 

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 

fulfilled by the lead contact, Mona Singh (mona@cs.princeton.edu). 

## Materials Availability 

This study did not generate new unique reagents. 

## Data and Code Availability 

● This paper analyzes existing, publicly available data. These accession numbers for the 

datasets are listed in the key resources table. 

● All original code has been deposited at GitHub and is publicly available as of the date of publication. 

● Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead 

contact upon request. 

## Additional Resources 

Dyscovr model results from TCGA patients are publicly searchable and downloadable at:  dyscovr.princeton.edu .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

## References 

1. Cheng, D. T. et al. Memorial Sloan Kettering -Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets 

(MSK -IMPACT). J. Mol. Diagn. 17 , 251 –264 (2015). 

2. Zhong, L. et al. Small molecules in targeted cancer therapy: advances, challenges, and future 

perspectives. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 6, 201 (2021). 

3. Shrestha, R. et al. HIT’nDRIVE: patient -specific multidriver gene prioritization for precision oncology. 

Genome Res. 27 , 1573 –1588 (2017). 

4. Bashashati, A. et al. DriverNet: uncovering the impact of somatic driver mutations on transcriptional 

networks in cancer. Genome Biol. 13 , R124 (2012). 

5. Ding, J. et al. Systematic analysis of somatic mutations impacting gene expression in 12 tumour types. 

Nat. Commun. 6, 8554 (2015). 

6. Bertrand, D. et al. Patient -specific driver gene prediction and risk assessment through integrated 

network analysis of cancer omics profiles. Nucleic Acids Res. 43 , e44 –e44 (2015). 

7. Ng, S. et al. PARADIGM -SHIFT predicts the function of mutations in multiple cancers using pathway 

impact analysis. Bioinformatics 28 , i640 –i646 (2012). 

8. Paull, E. O. et al. Discovering causal pathways linking genomic events to transcriptional states using 

Tied Diffusion Through Interacting Events (TieDIE). Bioinformatics 29 , 2757 –2764 (2013). 

9. Hou, J. P. & Ma, J. DawnRank: discovering personalized driver genes in cancer. Genome Med. 6, 56 

(2014). 

10. Khalighi, S. et al. SYSMut: decoding the functional significance of rare somatic mutations in cancer. 

Brief. Bioinform. 23 , bbac280 (2022). 

11. Osmanbeyoglu, H. U., Toska, E., Chan, C., Baselga, J. & Leslie, C. S. Pancancer modelling predicts 

the context -specific impact of somatic mutations on transcriptional programs. Nat. Commun. 8, 14249 (2017). 

12. Tao, Y. et al. Interpretable deep learning for chromatin -informed inference of transcriptional programs 

driven by somatic alterations across cancers. Nucleic Acids Res. 50 , 10869 –10881 (2022). 

13. Nagy, Á. & Győrffy, B. MU TARGET : A platform linking gene expression changes and mutation status in 

solid tumors. Int. J. Cancer 148 , 502 –511 (2021). 

14. Albert, F. W. & Kruglyak, L. The role of regulatory variation in complex traits and disease. Nat. Rev. 

Genet. 16 , 197 –212 (2015). 

15. Gong, J. et al. PancanQTL: systematic identification of cis -eQTLs and trans -eQTLs in 33 cancer types. 

Nucleic Acids Res. 46 , D971 –D976 (2018). 

16. O’Neil, N. J., Bailey, M. L. & Hieter, P. Synthetic lethality and cancer. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18 , 613 –623 

(2017). 

17. Dey, A., Mudunuri, S. & Kiran, M. MAGICAL: A multi -class classifier to predict synthetic lethal and 

viable interactions using protein -protein interaction network. PLOS Comput. Biol. 20 , e1012336 (2024). 

18. Cho, H., Berger, B. & Peng, J. Compact Integration of Multi -Network Topology for Functional Analysis 

of Genes. Cell Syst. 3, 540 -548.e5 (2016). 

19. Long, Y. et al. Graph contextualized attention network for predicting synthetic lethality in human 

cancers. Bioinformatics 37 , 2432 –2440 (2021). 

20. Jerby -Arnon, L. et al. Predicting Cancer -Specific Vulnerability via Data -Driven Detection of Synthetic 

Lethality. Cell 158 , 1199 –1209 (2014). 

21. Srihari, S., Singla, J., Wong, L. & Ragan, M. A. Inferring synthetic lethal interactions from mutual 

exclusivity of genetic events in cancer. Biol. Direct 10 , 57 (2015). 

22. Sinha, S. et al. Systematic discovery of mutation -specific synthetic lethals by mining pan -cancer human 

primary tumor data. Nat. Commun. 8, 15580 (2017). 

23. Pacini, C. et al. A comprehensive clinically informed map of dependencies in cancer cells and 

framework for target prioritization. Cancer Cell 42 , 301 -316.e9 (2024). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

24. Benfatto, S. et al. Uncovering cancer vulnerabilities by machine learning prediction of synthetic lethality. 

Mol. Cancer 20 , 111 (2021). 

25. Srivatsa, S. et al. Discovery of synthetic lethal interactions from large -scale pan -cancer perturbation 

screens. Nat. Commun. 13 , 7748 (2022). 

26. Tsherniak, A. et al. Defining a Cancer Dependency Map. Cell 170 , 564 -576.e16 (2017). 

27. Vogelstein, B. et al. Cancer Genome Landscapes. Science 339 , 1546 –1558 (2013). 

28. Garcia -Alonso, L., Holland, C. H., Ibrahim, M. M., Turei, D. & Saez -Rodriguez, J. Benchmark and 

integration of resources for the estimation of human transcription factor activities. Genome Res. 29 , 1363 –

1375 (2019). 

29. Fischer, M. Census and evaluation of p53 target genes. Oncogene 36 , 3943 –3956 (2017). 

30. Han, H. et al. TRRUST v2: an expanded reference database of human and mouse transcriptional 

regulatory interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 46 , D380 –D386 (2018). 

31. Zhang, Q. et al. hTFtarget: A Comprehensive Database for Regulations of Human Transcription 

Factors and Their Targets. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 18 , 120 –128 (2020). 

32. Kanehisa, M. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 28 , 27 –30 

(2000). 

33. Sondka, Z. et al. The COSMIC Cancer Gene Census: describing genetic dysfunction across all human 

cancers. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18 , 696 –705 (2018). 

34. Ashburner, M. et al. Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nat. Genet. 25 , 25 –29 (2000). 

35. Szklarczyk, D. et al. The STRING database in 2021: customizable protein –protein networks, and 

functional characterization of user -uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids Res. 49 , D605 –D612 

(2021). 

36. Subhasree, N., Jiangjiang, Q., Kalkunte, S., Minghai, W. & Ruiwen, Z. The MDM2 -p53 pathway 

revisited. J. Biomed. Res. 27 , 254 (2013). 

37. Cagnol, S. & Rivard, N. Oncogenic KRAS and BRAF activation of the MEK/ERK signaling pathway 

promotes expression of dual -specificity phosphatase 4 (DUSP4/MKP2) resulting in nuclear ERK1/2 inhibition. 

Oncogene 32 , 564 –576 (2013). 

38. Li, R. -Z. et al. The key role of sphingolipid metabolism in cancer: New therapeutic targets, diagnostic 

and prognostic values, and anti -tumor immunotherapy resistance. Front. Oncol. 12 , 941643 (2022). 

39. Griffith, M. et al. CIViC is a community knowledgebase for expert crowdsourcing the clinical 

interpretation of variants in cancer. Nat. Genet. 49 , 170 –174 (2017). 

40. Amankulor, N. M. et al. Mutant IDH1 regulates the tumor -associated immune system in gliomas. Genes 

Dev. 31 , 774 –786 (2017). 

41. Gillespie, M. et al. The reactome pathway knowledgebase 2022. Nucleic Acids Res. 50 , D687 –D692 

(2022). 

42. METABRIC Group et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals 

novel subgroups. Nature 486 , 346 –352 (2012). 

43. Yu, K. et al. PIK3CA variants selectively initiate brain hyperactivity during gliomagenesis. Nature 578 ,

166 –171 (2020). 

44. Sun, X. et al. FYCO1 regulates migration, invasion, and invadopodia formation in HeLa cells through 

CDC42/N -WASP/Arp2/3 signaling pathway. Biochem. Cell Biol. 100 , 458 –472 (2022). 

45. Stark, C. BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 34 , D535 –D539 

(2006). 

46. Wang, J. et al. SynLethDB 2.0: a web -based knowledge graph database on synthetic lethality for novel 

anticancer drug discovery. Database 2022 , baac030 (2022). 

47. Stickler, S., Rath, B. & Hamilton, G. Targeting KRAS in pancreatic cancer. Oncol. Res. 32 , 799 –805 

(2024). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

48. del Toro, N. et al. The IntAct database: efficient access to fine -grained molecular interaction data. 

Nucleic Acids Res. 50 , D648 –D653 (2022). 

49. Manchado, E. et al. A combinatorial strategy for treating KRAS -mutant lung cancer. Nature 534 , 647 –

651 (2016). 

50. Šuštić, T. et al. A role for the unfolded protein response stress sensor ERN1 in regulating the response 

to MEK inhibitors in KRAS mutant colon cancers. Genome Med. 10 , 90 (2018). 

51. McAllister, F. et al. Oncogenic Kras Activates a Hematopoietic -to -Epithelial IL -17 Signaling Axis in 

Preinvasive Pancreatic Neoplasia. Cancer Cell 25 , 621 –637 (2014). 

52. Kong, Y. et al. Mutant KRAS Mediates circARFGEF2 Biogenesis to Promote Lymphatic Metastasis of 

Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 83 , 3077 –3094 (2023). 

53. Relógio, A. et al. Ras -Mediated Deregulation of the Circadian Clock in Cancer. PLoS Genet. 10 ,

e1004338 (2014). 

54. Prieto -Garcia, C., Tomašković, I., Shah, V. J., Dikic, I. & Diefenbacher, M. USP28: Oncogene or Tumor 

Suppressor? A Unifying Paradigm for Squamous Cell Carcinoma. Cells 10 , 2652 (2021). 

55. Chen, Y. et al. CHEK2 knockout is a therapeutic target for TP53 -mutated hepatocellular carcinoma. 

Cell Death Discov. 10 , 37 (2024). 

56. Chrisanthar, R. et al. CHEK2 Mutations Affecting Kinase Activity Together With Mutations in TP53 

Indicate a Functional Pathway Associated with Resistance to Epirubicin in Primary Breast Cancer. PLoS ONE 

3, e3062 (2008). 

57. Choi, H. & Kang, C. Living Beyond Restriction: LBR promotes cellular immortalization by suppressing 

genomic instability and senescence. FEBS J. 291 , 2091 –2093 (2024). 

58. Zhang, J. & Chen, X. p53 tumor suppressor and iron homeostasis. FEBS J. 286 , 620 –629 (2019). 

59. Li, Z. & Xiong, Y. Cytoplasmic E3 ubiquitin ligase CUL9 controls cell proliferation, senescence, 

apoptosis and genome integrity through p53. Oncogene 36 , 5212 –5218 (2017). 

60. Huang, X. et al. NCDN is a Potential Biomarker and Therapeutic Target for Glioblastoma. J. Cancer 15 ,

1067 –1076 (2024). 

61. Yazgili, A. S., Ebstein, F. & Meiners, S. The Proteasome Activator PA200/PSME4: An Emerging New 

Player in Health and Disease. Biomolecules 12 , 1150 (2022). 

62. Ma, W., Zhang, X., Ma, C. & Liu, P. Highly expressed FAM189B predicts poor prognosis in 

hepatocellular carcinoma. Pathol. Oncol. Res. 28 , 1610674 (2022). 

63. Dos Santos, A., Ouellete, G., Diorio, C., Elowe, S. & Durocher, F. Knockdown of CKAP2 Inhibits 

Proliferation, Migration, and Aggregate Formation in Aggressive Breast Cancer. Cancers 14 , 3759 (2022). 

64. Basu, R. & Kopchick, J. J. The effects of growth hormone on therapy resistance in cancer. Cancer Drug 

Resist. https://doi.org/10.20517/cdr.2019.27 (2019) doi:10.20517/cdr.2019.27. 

65. Kong, R. et al. Myo9b is a key player in SLIT/ROBO -mediated lung tumor suppression. J. Clin. Invest. 

125 , 4407 –4420 (2015). 

66. Fu, F. et al. Role of Transmembrane 4 L Six Family 1 in the Development and Progression of Cancer. 

Front. Mol. Biosci. 7, 202 (2020). 

67. Xia, S. et al. SLC7A2 deficiency promotes hepatocellular carcinoma progression by enhancing 

recruitment of myeloid -derived suppressors cells. Cell Death Dis. 12 , 570 (2021). 

68. Wenzel, J. et al. Loss of the nuclear Wnt pathway effector TCF7L2 promotes migration and invasion of 

human colorectal cancer cells. Oncogene 39 , 3893 –3909 (2020). 

69. Lei, J., Xu, J. -Y., Hu, M., Wu, S. -G. & Zhou, J. MOB kinase activator 1A acts as an oncogene by 

targeting PI3K/AKT/mTOR in ovarian cancer. Discov. Oncol. 14 , 100 (2023). 

70. Jayarama, S. et al. MADD Is a Downstream Target of PTEN in Triggering Apoptosis. J. Cell. Biochem. 

115 , 261 –270 (2014). 

71. Lee, J. -S. et al. The insulin and IGF signaling pathway sustains breast cancer stem cells by IRS2/PI3K -

mediated regulation of MYC. Cell Rep. 41 , 111759 (2022). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

72. Day, E. et al. IRS2 is a candidate driver oncogene on 13q34 in colorectal cancer. Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 

94 , 203 –211 (2013). 

73. Wang, P., Mak, V. Cy. & Cheung, L. Wt. Drugging IGF -1R in cancer: New insights and emerging 

opportunities. Genes Dis. 10 , 199 –211 (2023). 

74. Santos, R. et al. A comprehensive map of molecular drug targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 16 , 19 –34 

(2017). 

75. Koehler, K., Liebner, D. & Chen, J. L. TP53 mutational status is predictive of pazopanib response in 

advanced sarcomas. Ann. Oncol. 27 , 539 –543 (2016). 

76. Sheth, H. et al. Excellent Response With Alpelisib and Bicalutamide for Advanced Salivary Duct 

Carcinoma With PIK3CA Mutation and High Androgen Receptor Expression —A Case Report. JCO Precis. 

Oncol. 744 –750 (2021) doi:10.1200/PO.20.00436. 

77. Merino, V. F. et al. Inhibitors of STAT 3, β ‐catenin, and IGF ‐1R sensitize mouse PIK 3 CA ‐mutant 

breast cancer to PI 3K inhibitors. Mol. Oncol. 11 , 552 –566 (2017). 

78. Zhang, Y., Duan, J., Liu, Y. & Zhang, Y. Breaking a bottleneck for on -target toxicity: A mutant -selective 

PI3Kα inhibitor finally comes. Innov. Med. 2, 100056 (2024). 

79. Hu, Y. et al. Dynamic molecular architecture and substrate recruitment of cullin3 –RING E3 ligase 

CRL3KBTBD2. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 31 , 336 –350 (2024). 

80. Werner, A. et al. Cell -fate determination by ubiquitin -dependent regulation of translation. Nature 525 ,

523 –527 (2015). 

81. Zhang, Z. et al. Insulin resistance and diabetes caused by genetic or diet -induced KBTBD2 deficiency 

in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113 , (2016). 

82. Juric, D. et al. Phosphatidylinositol 3 -Kinase α –Selective Inhibition With Alpelisib (BYL719) in PIK3CA -

Altered Solid Tumors: Results From the First -in -Human Study. J. Clin. Oncol. 36 , 1291 –1299 (2018). 

83. Elkabets, M. et al. mTORC1 Inhibition Is Required for Sensitivity to PI3K p110α Inhibitors in PIK3CA -

Mutant Breast Cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, (2013). 

84. Zou, Z., Tao, T., Li, H. & Zhu, X. mTOR signaling pathway and mTOR inhibitors in cancer: progress 

and challenges. Cell Biosci. 10 , 31 (2020). 

85. Averous, J., Fonseca, B. D. & Proud, C. G. Regulation of cyclin D1 expression by mTORC1 signaling 

requires eukaryotic initiation factor 4E -binding protein 1. Oncogene 27 , 1106 –1113 (2008). 

86. Varkaris, A. et al. Discovery and Clinical Proof -of -Concept of RLY -2608, a First -in -Class Mutant -

Selective Allosteric PI3Kα Inhibitor That Decouples Antitumor Activity from Hyperinsulinemia. Cancer Discov. 

14 , 240 –257 (2024). 

87. Enea, M. speedglm: Fitting linear and generalized linear models to large data sets. (2023). 

88. Storey, J. D. qvalue: Q -value estimation for false discovery rate control. 

89. Bledea, R. et al. Functional and topographic effects on DNA methylation in IDH1/2 mutant cancers. Sci. 

Rep. 9, 16830 (2019). 

90. Marcoulides, K. M. & Raykov, T. Evaluation of Variance Inflation Factors in Regression Models Using 

Latent Variable Modeling Methods. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 79 , 874 –882 (2019). 

91. Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR : a Bioconductor package for differential 

expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26 , 139 –140 (2010). 

92. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit -learn: Machine Learning in Python. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1201.0490 (2012) doi:10.48550/ARXIV.1201.0490. 

93. Fan, Y. et al. MuSE: accounting for tumor heterogeneity using a sample -specific error model improves 

sensitivity and specificity in mutation calling from sequencing data. Genome Biol. 17 , 178 (2016). 

94. Mayakonda, A., Lin, D. -C., Assenov, Y., Plass, C. & Koeffler, H. P. Maftools: efficient and 

comprehensive analysis of somatic variants in cancer. Genome Res. 28 , 1747 –1756 (2018). 

95. Campbell, B. B. et al. Comprehensive Analysis of Hypermutation in Human Cancer. Cell 171 , 1042 -

1056.e10 (2017). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

96. Keraite, I. et al. PIK3CA mutation enrichment and quantitation from blood and tissue. Sci. Rep. 10 ,

17082 (2020). 

97. Mondal, K., Posa, M. K., Shenoy, R. P. & Roychoudhury, S. KRAS Mutation Subtypes and Their 

Association with Other Driver Mutations in Oncogenic Pathways. Cells 13 , 1221 (2024). 

98. Murugan, A. K. & Alzahrani, A. S. Isocitrate Dehydrogenase IDH1 and IDH2 Mutations in Human 

Cancer: Prognostic Implications for Gliomas. Br. J. Biomed. Sci. 79 , 10208 (2022). 

99. Griffith, M. et al. CIViC is a community knowledgebase for expert crowdsourcing the clinical 

interpretation of variants in cancer. Nat. Genet. 49 , 170 –174 (2017). 

100. Van Loo, P. et al. Allele -specific copy number analysis of tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 , 16910 –

16915 (2010). 

101. Du, P. et al. Comparison of Beta -value and M -value methods for quantifying methylation levels by 

microarray analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 11 , 587 (2010). 

102. Aran, D., Sirota, M. & Butte, A. J. Systematic pan -cancer analysis of tumour purity. Nat. Commun. 6,

8971 (2015). 

103. Carrot -Zhang, J. et al. Comprehensive Analysis of Genetic Ancestry and Its Molecular Correlates in 

Cancer. Cancer Cell 37 , 639 -654.e6 (2020). 

104. Sturm, G., Finotello, F. & List, M. Immunedeconv: An R Package for Unified Access to Computational 

Methods for Estimating Immune Cell Fractions from Bulk RNA -Sequencing Data. in Bioinformatics for Cancer 

Immunotherapy (ed. Boegel, S.) vol. 2120 223 –232 (Springer US, New York, NY, 2020). 

105. Chen, B., Khodadoust, M. S., Liu, C. L., Newman, A. M. & Alizadeh, A. A. Profiling Tumor Infiltrating 

Immune Cells with CIBERSORT. in Cancer Systems Biology (ed. Von Stechow, L.) vol. 1711 243 –259 

(Springer New York, New York, NY, 2018). 

106. Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: A Tool Set for Whole -Genome Association and Population -Based Linkage 

Analyses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81 , 559 –575 (2007). 

107. Brownlee, J. Data Preparation for Machine Learning: Data Cleaning, Feature Selection, and Data 

Transforms in Python . (Machine Learning Mastery, 2020). 

108. Cerami, E. et al. The cBio Cancer Genomics Portal: An Open Platform for Exploring Multidimensional 

Cancer Genomics Data. Cancer Discov. 2, 401 –404 (2012). 

109. Liao, S. et al. The molecular landscape of premenopausal breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 17 , 104 

(2015). 

110. Becht, E. et al. Estimating the population abundance of tissue -infiltrating immune and stromal cell 

populations using gene expression. Genome Biol. 17 , 218 (2016). 

111. Korotkevich, G. et al. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/060012 

(2016). 

112. Yu, G. & He, Q. -Y. ReactomePA: an R/Bioconductor package for reactome pathway analysis and 

visualization. Mol. Biosyst. 12 , 477 –479 (2016). 

113. Wang, J. Z., Du, Z., Payattakool, R., Yu, P. S. & Chen, C. -F. A new method to measure the semantic 

similarity of GO terms. Bioinformatics 23 , 1274 –1281 (2007). 

114. Mosteller, F. Questions and Answers. Am. Stat. 2, 30 –31 (1948). 

115. Dempster, J. M. et al. Chronos: a cell population dynamics model of CRISPR experiments that 

improves inference of gene fitness effects. Genome Biol. 22 , 343 (2021). 

116. Diehl, V. et al. Minimized combinatorial CRISPR screens identify genetic interactions in autophagy. 

Nucleic Acids Res. 49 , 5684 –5704 (2021). 

117. Xie, L. et al. A Synthetic Interaction Screen Identifies Factors Selectively Required for Proliferation and 

TERT Transcription in p53 -Deficient Human Cancer Cells. PLoS Genet. 8, e1003151 (2012). 

118. Lü, Y. et al. Genome -wide CRISPR screens identify novel regulators of wild -type and mutant p53 

stability. Mol. Syst. Biol. 20 , 719 –740 (2024). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

119. Liu, C., Banister, C. E. & Buckhaults, P. J. Spindle Assembly Checkpoint Inhibition Can Resensitize 

p53 -Null Stem Cells to Cancer Chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 79 , 2392 –2403 (2019). 

120. Wishart, D. S. et al. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids 

Res. 46 , D1074 –D1082 (2018). 

121. Kassambara, A. survminer: Drawing Survival Curves using ‘ggplot2’. 

## FIGURES 

Figure 1. Methodological overview of Dyscovr pipeline. A. Dyscovr leverages matched somatic mutation, 

gene expression, methylation, and copy number alteration (CNA) data from primary patient tumors, such as 

those available through the Cancer Genome Atlas ( TCGA ). B. Across all cancer types, and within individual 

cancer types, Dyscovr considers a set S of the most recurrently mutated cancer driver genes across patient 

samples . Nonsynonymous mutations, including missense, nonsense, nonstop, and splice site mutations, are 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

considered. C. Within each sample population, Dyscovr fits a linear regression model for each candidate target 

gene t and tests for a n association between the expression of t and the nonsynonymous mutation status of driver 

genes . The model also incorporates other driver - and target -specific features , including CNA and methylation 

status , as well as clinical features. The expression of gene t is correlated to the nonsynonymous mutation status 

of a driver gene d if the fit coefficient  𝛼 𝑑  is significantly different from zero (Methods I) . D. For cases where 

Dyscovr identifies a significant association between the nonsynonymous mutation status of a driver gene d and 

the expression of a target gene t, both in a pan -cancer context and within at least one individual cancer type, we 

evaluate the pair for a potential genetic interaction using cell line data from the Cancer Dependency Map 

(DepMap) 26 . We use a linear regression model to test for a n association between cell viability upon CRISPR 

knockdown of target gene t and both the nonsynonymous mutation status and expression of d (Methods VII). 

This process results in a ranked list of target genes that Dyscovr predicts to participate in a genetic interact ion 

with the corresponding driver gene ; these interactions nominate driver -associated conditional genetic 

vulnerabilities .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

Figure 2. Dyscovr uncovers pan -cancer associations between mutated driver s and target gene 

expression changes . A. The number of significant associations ( q < 0.01 ) identified for TP53 , PIK3CA , KRAS ,

and IDH1 , the four cancer driver genes included in pan -cancer modeling. Each hit represents a putative 

relationship between a nonsynonymous mutation in th e driver gene and an expression change in a target gene. 

The first stage of Dyscovr uncover s hundreds of significant associations at this threshold for all recurrently 

mutated driver genes, while yield ing only three hits for TTN (a frequently mutated gene not annotated as cancer -

relevant 27 ,33 ). B. Bar chart showing the enrichment of effector TF targets from DoRothEA 28 . For TP53 , enrichment 

is calculated using TP53 -specific target genes (N = 248) . For PIK3CA, KRAS , and IDH1 , enrichment is calculated 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

using pooled targets from multiple literature -supported effector TFs (PIK3CA : N = 605 ; KRAS : N = 679 ; IDH1 : N

= 240 ; Table S2). Bar height represents -log10 (p-value ) from a one -sided GSEA test, with dotted line indicating 

p = 0.05 . C. The cumulative fraction of curated TP53 targets (Fischer et al. 29 , blue) and members of the TP53 

signaling pathway (Reactome 41 R-HSA -3700989 , red) among an increasing fraction of q-value -ranked TP53 hits 

from a Dyscovr model using nonsynonymous mutations (solid lines ) or silent mutations (dashed lines ) as a 

control. Inlay (top right) shows the top 50 ranked TP53 hits. D. Bar chart showing the enrichment of known cancer 

genes from the Cancer Gene Census (CGC) 33 among each driver gene’s q-value ranked targets from Dyscovr .

Bar height represents -log10 (p-value) from a one -sided GSEA test , with the dotted line indicating p = 0.05. E. 

Network visualization of interconnected Dyscovr stage one results for TP53 overlaid on the STRING functional 

protein -protein interaction network 35 , with TP53 shown in green. T he t op 100 TP53 hits (q < 0.01 ) connected 

either to TP53 or to another hit with STRING confidence >0.4 are displayed . Node color indicates the predicted 

direction of regulation (upregulation in orange, downregulation in blue). F. Volcano plots of Dyscovr predictions 

for each driver gene, with a selection of the most statistically significant hits labeled. The x-axis shows the 

regression coefficient for the driver mutation status term (thresholded to the range [-1, 1] for visualization) , with 

predicted upregulat ed target genes in orange and downregulat ed target genes in blue at q < 0.01 (dotted line). 

The y-axis shows the -log10 (q-value ) for the driver mutation status te rm. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

Figure 3. Dyscovr identifies associations between mutated cancer d river s and dysregulated gene 

expression across 19 TCGA cancer types. A. In each of 19 TCGA cancer types, the first stage of Dyscovr 

was applied to every candidate target gene, with each regression including covariates for all driver genes 

mutated at ≥5% frequency in that cancer type . Segments of the stacked bars represent the percentage of 

significant hits ( q < 0.2) in each cancer type ( x-axis) attributed to a given driver gene. Each segment is labeled 

with the absolute number of dysregulated targets associated with that driver in the corresponding cancer type (q

< 0.2 ). See Table S1 for full cancer type names. B. Bar chart of the Spearman’s rank correlation (y-axis ) between 

the nonsynonymous mutation status coefficient estimated by Dyscovr for the indicated drivers (x-axis, PIK3CA 

in red, TP53 in blue) across target genes that are significant at q < 0. 2 in two breast cancer cohorts: TCGA -

BRCA and METABRIC . Pairwise Spearman correlation coefficient s are 0. 84 for PIK3CA and 0. 62 for TP53 .

Hypergeometric enrichment p-values are 3.42E -06 for TP53 and 1.50E -61 for PIK3CA . C. UpSet plots for the 

five driver genes with the largest absolute number of significant targets across at least three cancer types: TP53, 

PIK3CA , KRAS, CTNNB1, and FBXW7 . Plots show the number of significantly dysregulated target genes (q <

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

0.2 ; capped at 1000 for visual clarity ) in each of the up -to -five cancer types with the most hits for that driver 

(bottom left, yellow) , as well as the intersections of targets shared across cancer types (blue). Significant targets 

shared among the most cancer types are labeled and colored by direction of regulation (upregulation in orange, 

downregulation in blue, variable direction in gray). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48 

Figure 4. Dyscovr reveals genetic interactors with cancer driver genes TP53 , PIK3CA , and KRAS . A. 

Schematic illustrating clinically relevant types of genetic interactions identified by the second stage of Dyscovr .

For tumor suppressor genes (blue, i.e. TP53 ), Dyscovr identif ies acquired vulnerabilities, in which mutations in 

the driver gene render cancer cells more sensitive to inhibition of the target gene . For oncogenes (pink, i.e. 

KRAS and PIK3CA ), Dyscovr identif ies both acquired and co -targeting vulnerabilities , where joint inhibition of 

the driver and the target gene more effectively reduces cell viability relative to inhibiting either gene alone . B.

Schematic illustrating how Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap) 26 cell line data and Dyscovr’s transcriptional 

predictions are integrated to infer putative genetic interact ions . For pan -cancer driver genes with sufficient cell 

line representation (TP53 , PIK3CA , and KRAS), we report the number of significant transcriptional hits from 

phase one of Dyscovr ( q < 0.2) that are found both pan -cancer (“Pan”) and in at least one individual cancer type 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49 

(“Per”) at the top. In the middle, we report the number of significant genes that are predicted to be genetic 

interactor s with the associated driver, defined as genes whose knockout -associated cell viability is associated 

with driver activity. At the bottom, we report the number of significant genes classified as vulnerabilit ies either 

when the driver is mutated (“acquired”) or when jointly inhibited with the driver (“co -targeting”). C. Cumulative 

enrichment ratio of gold -standard genetic interactions (Meth ods VIII.B, Table S5) amongst Dyscovr ’s ranked 

genetic interactors for TP53 (gold -standard interactions N = 856 ), PIK3CA (N = 195 ), and KRAS (N = 4576 ). D.

Intersection of clinically relevant conditional genetic vulnerabilities for each of TP53, PIK3CA, and KRAS with 

known US FDA approved drug targets 74 (Methods VIII.C, Table S6) . Genes with an associated drug are 

annotated and colored according to whether they were predicted to represent acquired or co -targeting 

vulnerabilit ies .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

Figure 5. Mutant PIK3CA and KBTBD2 expression exhibit a genetic interaction in vitro . A. Schematic 

illustrating a proposed mechanism -of -action underlying the predicted genetic interaction between mutated 

PIK3CA and dysregulated expression of KBTBD2 . Dyscovr identifies an association between PIK3CA 

nonsynonymous mutation status and KBTBD2 downregulation, both pan -cancer ( q = 6.53E -04) and in breast 

cancer ( q = 4.80E -02). This pair is also predicted to be a “co -targeting” vulnerability via cell viability analysis in 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

51 

the second phase of Dyscovr (q = 6.1 0E-02, Methods VIII.D ). KBTBD2 has been previously identified as being 

a regulator of insulin signaling in mouse models via its regulation of p85α protein abundance, with low levels of 

KBTBD2 corresponding to suppressed PI3K -AKT signaling 81 . This proposed system suggests that inhibition of 

mutant PIK3CA may lead to recovery of KBTBD2 expression; consequently , simultaneous inhibition of mutant 

PIK3CA and KBTBD2 may produce synergistic negative effects o n cell growth. B. The per -drug Spearman’s 

rank correlation between reported drug sensitivity score s from DepMap (AUC) and cell viability upon CRISPR 

knockout of KBTBD2 (x-axis) , plotted against the significance of that correlation (y-axis) . Correlations were 

computed pan -cancer across cell lines and each of 4 ,659 drugs from DepMap. Drugs with statistically significant 

correlations to cell viability upon KBTBD2 knockout ( q < 0.2) are colored, with positive correlations in red and 

negative correlations in blue. Labels with an asterisk (*) denote drugs that target insulin like growth factor 1 

receptor (IGF1R ), suggesting that cell lines most sensitive to KBTBD2 knockout also tend to be most sensitive 

to inhibitors of insulin signaling. C-D. Survival of pan -cancer ( C) or breast cancer ( D) TCGA patient s significantly 

differs when stratified by “low” or “high” KBTBD2 expression ( p = 2.26E -07 and hazard ratio of 2.61 pan -cancer, 

p = 4.51E -02 and hazard ratio of 2.99 in BRCA). Survival rate ( y-axis) over time in days ( x-axis) was calculated 

using a Cox proportional hazards model that accounts for the nonsynonymous mutation status of PIK3CA and 

other clinical and molecular confounders (Methods IX) . E. qPCR -based quantification of KBTBD2 mRNA 

expression in MCF7 cells treated for 48 hours with an siRNA control or siRNA against KBTBD2 . Data are 

presented as mean ± SD, and statistical significance is indicated (** p < 0.01). F. Relative cell growth in response 

to alpelisib treatment in siControl and siKBTBD2 treated cells. MCF7 cells were transfected with siControl or 

siKBTBD2 for 48 hours, followed by alpelisib treatment at indicated doses for an additional 2 days. Cell growth 

was quantified by SRB staining. Data are presented as mean ± SD. G. Western blot analysis of PI3K signal 

transduction following alpelisib treatment and KBTBD2 knockdown. MCF7 cells were transfected with siControl 

or siKBTBD2 for 48 hours, followed by treatment with 1 μM alpelisib for time t (h ours ). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 18, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.20.624509 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52 

TABLES 

Driver Gene  10 Most Significant Associated CGC 5 Genes 

TP53  MDM2 , CDKN1A , DDB2 , BUB1B , CDKN2A , FANCD2 , STIL ,

CHEK2 , XPC , KNSTRN 

PIK3CA  PIK3R1 , ETV4 , AR , TET2 , BAZ1A , IDH2 , SBDS , VTI1A , SOX2 ,

NOTCH2 

KRAS  ETV4 , ETV5 , TCF7L2 , CANT1 , RHOA , SLC45A3 , CREB3L1, 

ARHGAP26 , CEBPA , PPP2R1A 

IDH1  TCF12 , FBXW7 , PRKCB , ID3 , GAS7 , MAML2 , CHIC2 , PRDM2 ,

HIF1A , TET2 

Table 1. Top predicted dysregulated cancer genes from the Cancer Gene Census (CGC) 33 in relation to 

mutations in driver genes . Ten most statistically significant (ranked by q-value) CGC dysregulated target genes 

from phase one of Dyscovr for each driver gene are shown, with those genes that are upregulated in relation to 

driver gene in orange and those that are downregulated in relation to driver gene in blue (pan -cancer) .