Title: Multi-compartment immune and tumor cell reprogramming by IFNa2 overcomes colon cancer immunotherapy resistance

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 23:32:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
1

Multi -compartment immune and tumor cell r eprogramming by IFN 2 overcomes colo n

cancer immun otherapy resistance 

Zainab Tiamiyu 1,2 *, Patrick Czabala 1,2 *, Jennifer Worthy 3, Luis Velasquez Zarate 3, Mei Zheng 3,

Dakota B. Poschel 1,2 , Kendra Fick 1,2 , Dafeng Yang 1,2 , Henry R. Monnig 1, Richa Rashmi 4, Sergei 

Bombin 4, Priscilla S. Redd 1,2, 5#, and Kebin Liu 1,2, 4#,

> 1

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta 

University, Augusta, GA. 2VA Augusta Health Care System , Augusta, GA. 3Department of 

Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, 4Georgia Cancer Center, Medical 

College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA. 5CheMedImmune Inc. , Augusta, GA. USA .

* Equal contr ibutions 

Running title: IFN 2 reprograms both immune and tumor comportments in lung metastasis 

Conflict of interest: The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest 

> #

Correspondence: Priscilla S. Redd, email:  Predd@augusta.edu , or Kebin Liu, email: 

Kliu@augusta.edu . 1410 Laney Walker Blvd, Augusta, GA 30912. USA. Tel: 706 -721 -9483 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

SUMMARY 

Tumor cell PD -L1 represses IFN signaling to limit anti -tumor immunity, despite an IFN -

responsive immuno phenotype predicting colorectal cancer response to immune checkpoint 

inhibitor therapy. Lipid nanoparticle (LNP) -encapsulated IFNα2 -encoding nanoplasmid (LNP -

mIFNα2) gene therapy suppresses tumor progression, however, the underlying mechanism and 

therapeutic trade -offs of the accompanying proinflammatory cytokine response triggered by 

nucleic acid delivery remain undefined . Here, we show that LNP -mIF Nα2 selectively transfects 

tumor cells to restore local IFNα2 production in lung metastases , suppressing colon cancer lung 

metastasis in syngeneic and humanized mouse models and sensitizing tumors to ICI therapy. 

Efficacy required canonical IFNAR1 signaling, and was further enhanced by neutralizing co -

induced IL6 . Single -cell RNA sequencing revealed coordinated tumor microenvironment 

reprogramming with SPP1 + macrophages underwent apoptosis while incoming monocytes 

acquired an IFN -responsive identity, Tpex cells lost their quiescence program and expanded, and 

tumor cells lost their high -cycling ph enotype while increasing antigen presentation and immune -

cell -recruiting chemokines. Tumor cells also shifted away from a hypoxia/HIF -1α -driven 

cuproptosis -resistance program, with increased Fdx1 and copper -importer expression and 

decreased metallothionein Mt1, suggesting sensitization to cop roptosis pathway. The LNP -

mIFNα2 -treated tumor microenvironment transcriptionally recapitulated T cell and myeloid 

signatures of pembrolizumab -responsive patients. Our findings establish LNP -delivered IFNα2 

as a multi -compartment TME regulator that reprograms myeloid suppression, reinvigorates 

exhausted T cells, and restores tumor immunogenicity. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Key points: 

LNP -mIFNα2 eliminates SPP1+ TAMs and reprograms monocytes to an IFN -responsive state 

LNP -mIFNα2 relieves Tpex quiescence to expand Tpex and contract Tex -term cells 

Tumor cells lose a high -cycling state and a HIF1α -driven cuproptosis -resistance phenotype 

LNP -mIFNα2 -reprogrammed mouse TME mirrors pembrolizumab -responsive human tumors 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

INTRODUCTION 

Immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) immunotherapy has transformed outcomes in human cancer 

therapy and has been approved for colorectal cancer (CRC) patients harboring mismatch repair -

deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability -high (MSI -H) tumors 1,2 . However, fewer than 50% 

of dMMR /MSI CRC patients respond durably 1,3 , and, critically, approximately 85 -90 % of CRC 

cases are proficient mismatch repair (pMMR) tumors that are broadly non -responsive to ICI 

therapy 4-6. The molecular mechanisms underlying ICI resistance remain poorly understood, and 

no effective strategy exists to convert checkpoint -resistant CRC into an immunotherapy -

responsive state. Interferon (IFN) is an essential component of host cancer immune surveillance 7-

> 19

. A large body of evidence implicates defective IFN response in cancer patient as a key 

determinant of ICI resistance 20,21 . Loss -of -function mutations in JAK1 and JAK2 , key transducers 

of IFN receptor signaling , confer both primary and acquired resistance to ICI immunotherapy 20 -27 .

Conversely, a constitutive interferon -high immunophenotype has recently been defined as a robust 

predictor of ICI response specifically in CRC 6, reinforcing IFN signaling as a central axis of 

antitumor immune competence. These observations collectively establish the loss of IFN function 

as a mechanism of tumor immune evasion and suggest that restoring IFN -I activity within the 

tumor immune microenvironment is a mechanistically grounded strategy to overcome ICI 

resistance. 

The PD -(L) 1 axis suppresses antitumor immunity through multiple cellular mechanisms. 

Beyond the canonical engagement of PD -1 on cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) to inhibit their 

activation, tumor cell PD -L1 also engages PD -1 expressed on myeloid cells, an interaction we 

have previously shown to suppress IFN -I production, repress CXCL9 expression, and impair CTL 

recruitment to lung metastases 28 . Loss of IFN -I expression thus emerges as a critical and proximal 

consequence of PD -L1 immune suppression within the metastatic niche, providing a mechanistic 

rationale for directly restoring IFN -I rather than relying on ICI alone to relieve this suppression in 

a TME that has already silenced the upstream innate immune signal. 

Recombinant IFNα is an FDA -approved anticancer agent with clinical activity in melanoma 

and renal cell carcinoma 29 -31 . However, its short half -life necessitates frequent high doses , resulting 

in substantial toxicity including inflammatory symptoms, hematologic toxicity, and tissue 

injury 32,33 . Pegylat ion of IFNα extends its half -life and reduces dosing frequency but does not 

significantly reduce overall toxicity 34 -36 . Other engineered approaches, such as tumor -activated 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

IFN prodrugs or antibody -cytokine fusion proteins, aim to improve tumor targeting but still rely 

on systemic recombinant protein delivery 37,38 . These limitations highlight the challenge of 

achieving potent, localized IFN  activity while minimizing systemic toxicity. 

The clinical success of lipid nanoparticle (LNP) -based mRNA vaccines has validated LNP 

platforms as safe and effective systems for in vivo nucleic acid delivery 39 . LNPs enable 

intracellular expression of therapeutic proteins following nucleic acid transfection. Consistent with 

this paradigm, plasmid DNA can be encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles to drive therapeutic protein 

expression in vivo. DOTAP -cholesterol LNPs accumulate preferentially in tumor tissues and 

facilitate efficient gene delivery vivo 40 -43 . Systemic administration of mRNA -LNPs has been 

shown to elicit a transient IFN -I surge that resets the TME and sensitizes immunologically cold 

tumors to ICI therapy 19 . However, LNP delivery of plasmid DNA (pDNA) introduces an 

additional layer of innate immune activation via cytosolic cGAS -STING sensing of the DNA 

backbone, which drives robust but transient production of IFN -I and pro -inflammatory cytokines 

including IL 644 . This dual mechanism , cGAS -STING -driven innate activation plus transgene -

encoded IFNα2 protein signaling through IFNAR1 , creates both an opportunity and a challenge: 

the opportunity to achieve durable IFN -I activity within the TME, and the challenge of managing 

the pDNA -associated inflammatory response to preserve tolerability. 

Underscoring the clinical relevance of restoring tumor IFN -I activity, a recent first -in -human 

phase 1/2a trial in glioblastoma used genetically engineered autologous hematopoietic stem cells 

to enable tumor -restricted, myeloid cell -mediated IFNα2 gene the rapy, demonstrating feasibility, 

safety, and reprogramming of the tumor immune microenvironment without systemic toxicity 45 .

While this cell -based platform establishes proof -of -concept for IFNα2 gene therapy in human 

cancer , it requires ex vivo lentiviral transduction and myeloablative conditioning, underscoring the 

need for a simpler, off -the -shelf strategy capable of achieving comparable tumor -restricted IFN -I

activity through direct systemic administration. 

Here, we use LNP -mIFNα2, a lipid nanoparticle -encapsulated nanoplasmid, to assess systemic 

proinflammatory response and dissect how restoring IFN -I signaling reprograms the metastatic 

tumor microenvironment and . We define its multi -compartment TME reprogramming activity, 

including reversal of a tumor -intrinsic cuproptosis -resistance program, its cytokine profile, and 

IFNAR1 -dependent antitumor activity, revealing IL6 as a targetable liability. We show that LNP -

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

mIFNα2 transcriptionally reprograms the TME to mirror immunotherapy -responsive human 

cancer, offering a strategy to overcome ICI resistance in metastatic CRC. 

RESULTS 

LNP -mIFN 2 transgene selectively transfects tumor cell s to express IFN 2 locally to 

overcome colon tumor lung metastasis resistance to PD -1 blockade immunotherapy 

Lipid nanoparticle -encapsulated mouse codon usage -optimized IFN 2-encoding 

nanoplasmid 46 (LNP -mIFN 2) gene immunotherapy selectively delivers the nano plasmid to 

tumor -bearing lungs in mice 47 . To determine the target cells of LNP -mIFN 2 in the metastases -

bearing lungs , LNP -mIFN 2 was administered to CT26 tumor -bearing mice using an experimental 

lung metastasis model (Fig. 1A -B) . Single cells were prepared from the tumor -bearing lungs and 

CD45 -PD -L1 + tumor cells , T (CD3 +), and myeloid (CD11b +) cells were sorted out (Fig. 1C). 

Codon -usage -optimized mIFN 2 sequence -specific PCR analysis 47 detected transgene expression 

predominantly in tumor cells , with lower expression in T and myeloid cells (Fig. 1D -E) . Systemic 

IFN 2 protein production was detected in serum which peaked within 4-12 hours of LNP -mIFN 2

treatment and declined to near baseline by day 3 (Fig. 1F). In tumor -bearing lungs, mIFN 2

protein reached plateau at 12 hours and remained detectable through day 9 (Fig. 1G), 

demonstrating a durable local IFN 2 production within the metastatic site. 

We next evaluated antitumor efficacy in mouse colon tumor syngeneic lung metastasis models, 

which are resistant to PD -(L)1 ICI monotherapy 48,49 . Intravenous injection of CT26 cells followed 

by treatment with LNP -mIFN 2 alone or in combination with anti -PD -1 mAb reduced lung 

metastasis, while anti -PD -1 monotherapy had no effect (Fig. 1H). When treatment was delayed to 

day 5 resemble a higher tumor burden, both LNP -mIFN 2 and the combination remained highly 

effective (Fig. 1H) . To assess generalizability across colon tumor models, we tested LNP -mIFN 2

in the MC38 -met model, a metastatic variant of the MC38 colon adenocarcinoma cell line 28 . Anti -

PD -1 monotherapy was again ineffective, while LNP -mIFN 2 alone and in combination with anti -

PD -1 significantly reduced lung metastasis (Fig. 1I). To evaluate translational potential, we 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

established a humanized NSG mouse model by engrafting human peripheral blood mononuclear 

cells (PBMCs), followed by intravenous injection of the human colon cancer cell line SW620. 

Treatment with LNP -hIFN 2 alone and in combination with nivolumab significantly suppressed 

SW620 lung metastasis, while nivolumab alone had no significant effect (Fig. 1J). Together, these 

results establish that LNP -IFN 2 overcomes colon cancer resistance to PD -1 blockade 

immunotherapy to suppress colon cancer lung metastasis across multiple syngeneic and humanized 

preclinical models. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Figure 1 . LNP -mIFN 2 gene immunotherapy forces tumor cells to express IFNα2 to 

overcomes colon tumor resistance to PD -1 inhibitor immunotherap y. 

A. Schematic of LNP -mIFN 2 formulation. Codon -usage -optimized mouse IFN 2-encoding 

nano plasmid NTC9385R was formulated with a DOTAP -cholesterol lipid to assemble lipid 

nanoparticles (LNP -mIFN 2). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

B. Scanning electron microscopy image of LNP -mIFN 2. Scale bar, 100 nm. 

C. Flow cytometry gating strategy for isolation of T (CD45 +CD3 +), myeloid (CD45 +CD11b +)

and tumor (CD45 -PD -L1 +) cells from CT26 metastas es-bearing lungs. 

D. PCR detection of codon usage -optimized mIFN 2 transgene (cuo -IFN 2) in tumor cells ,

tumor -bearing total lung tissues (lung cells), T cells (CD3 +), and myeloid cells (CD11b +) as 

shown in C. β-Actin serves as a loading control. 

E. Quantification of cuo -mIFNα2 transgene expression across sorted cell populations as shown 

in D. The expression level in myeloid cells was arbitrarily set at 1 and used as reference for 

other cell types. 

F. Serum mIFN 2 protein kinetics after intravenous LNP -mIFNα2 administration in CT26 

metastasis -bearing mice, measured by ELISA. Data represent mean ± SD .

G. mIFN 2 protein kinetics in tumor -bearing lung tissue after intravenous LNP -mIFNα2 

administration, measured by ELISA. Data represent mean ± SD .

H. Antitumor efficacy of LNP -mIFNα2 alone and in combination with anti -PD -1 antibody in the 

CT26 syngeneic lung metastasis model. CT26 cells were injected intravenously into BALB/c 

mice. Mice were treated with LNP, anti -PD -1, LNP -mIFNα2, or LNP -mIFNα2 + anti -PD -1

beginning on day 3 (upper panel) or day 5 (lower panel) post -tumor inoculation. Upper panel, 

left: representative gross photographs of representative metastasis -bearing lungs at 

experimental endpoint of the day 3 treatment; top right: treatment sch eme; bottom right: lung 

metastasis nodule counts for day 3 treatment initiation cohort. Lower panel, top: treatment 

scheme; bottom: nodule counts for day 5 treatment initiation cohort. 

I. Antitumor efficacy in the MC38 -met syngeneic lung metastasis model. MC38 -met cells were 

injected intravenously into C57BL/6 mice. Mice were treated with LNP, anti -PD -1, LNP -

mIFNα2 , or LNP -mIFNα2 + anti -PD -1 beginning on day 3 post -tumor inoculation as in H. 

Left: representative gross photographs of metastasis -bearing lungs. Right top: experiment 

scheme; right bottom: lung metastasis nodule counts. Data represent mean ± SD. 

J. Antitumor efficacy of LNP -hIFNα2 in a humanized NSG mouse model of human colon cancer 

lung metastasis. Tumor -bearing humanized mice were treated with LNP, nivolumab, LNP -

hIFNα2 (LNP -encapsulated human IFN 2-encoding plasmid, or LNP -hIFN 2+nivolumab. 

Left: representative gross photographs of metastasis -bearing lungs. Right top : experiment 

scheme; right bottom: lung metastasis nodule counts. Data represent mean ± SD. 

LNP -mIFN 2 induces a transient cytokine response 

A major adverse effect for LNP -based nucleic acid therapies is the induction of a systemic 

inflammatory cytokine response 44 . To characterize the cytokine profile induced by LNP -

mIFNα2, we collected serum from mice and measured a broad panel of cytokines (Fig. 2A -H). 

Among pro -inflammatory cytokines, IL6 , a driver of acute phase reactant production , was 

marke dly elevated at 4 h in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice and returned toward baseline by 24 h 

(Fig. 2A), consistent with an acute, self -resolving innate response to LNP administration. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Importantly, the classical pro -inflammatory cytokines IL1α, IL1β, TNFα, and GM -CSF remained 

at low levels. 

Regulatory cytokines IL10 and TGFβ were modestly elevated in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice, 

particularly at 4 h, and declined by 24 h (Fig. 2B). Th1 -associated cytokines showed a selective 

and distinctive pattern (Fig. 2C). IL12p70 , IL27 and IL2 were not induced . In contrast, IFNγ was 

substantially elevated at 4 h in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice and declined by 24 h, indicating rapid 

NK cell or T cell activation in response to type I IFN signaling. Total IFNα levels were robustly 

elevated at 4 h and declined shar ply by 24 h. IFNβ levels were modestly elevated at 4 h. Th2 -

associated cytokines remained at baseline across all conditions and timepoints (Fig. 2D). Th17 -

associated cytokines showed a selective elevation pattern (Fig. 2E). IL17α and IL -17F were not 

signif icantly induced. However, IL22 and IL23 were modestly elevated at 4 h in LNP -mIFNα2 -

treated mice, suggesting limited inflammasome or innate lymphoid cell activation in response to 

LNP -delivered nucleic acid. VEGF, representing the angiogenic cytokine class , was not 

significantly altered in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice compared to controls at either timepoint (Fig. 

2F). 

Chemokines CXCL1, Cxcl9, and CXCL10 were elevated at 4 h in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice 

(Fig. 2G). CXCL10 is a canonical IFN -I-stimulated gene product that recruits CXCR3 + effector T 

cells and NK cells to sites of infection and inflammation 50 , directly linking the IFNα2 response to 

anti -tumor immune cell trafficking. CCL2 were also elevated at 4 h, indicating monocyte 

chemoattractant signaling. CXCL2 and CXCL20 showed modest elevation. CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, 

CCL11, CCL24, CCL9, CX3CL1, and CXCL12 w ere largely unchanged. XCL1 was markedly 

elevated at 4 h, particularly in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice. XCL1 is a unique chemokine produced 

by activated CD8 + T cells and NK cells that recruits XCR1 + cDC1s for cross -presentation, 

suggesting early innate immune c oordination. Collectively, the chemokine response is consistent 

with IFN -driven recruitment of cytotoxic effector cells rather than pro -inflammatory myeloid cell 

influx. 

Serum IFNα2 protein was at high levels at 4 h and remains detectable by 24 h (Fig. 2H), 

consistent with the pharmacokinetic profile observed in tumor -bearing lungs (Fig. 1F -G). The 

absence of detectable IFNα2 in LNP and control groups confirms that the measured IFNα2 protein 

is derived from in vivo transgene translation. LNP -mIFNα2 boost therapy induces a similar 

cytokine profile as the prime therapy (Fig. S1A -H). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

To contextualize these mouse findings in human cancer, we analyzed serum cytokines and 

chemokines from CRC patients and healthy donors (Fig . S2A-F). CRC patients exhibited 

significantly elevated IL6 and GM -CSF (Fig. S 2A), IL12p70 (Fig. S 2B), IL10 (Fig. S 2D), and the 

chemokines CXCL10 and CXCL5 (Fig. S 2F), while Th2 - and Th17 -associated cytokines were 

unchanged (Fig. S 2C & E). The elevation of the chemokine CXCL10 was also induced by LNP -

mIFN 2 in mice (Fig. 2G). 

Figure 2 . LNP -mIFNα2 induces a transient type I interferon and chemokine response. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

A. Pro -inflammatory cytokines in mouse serum . Mice were treated with LNP or LNP -mIFNα2 

and serum was collected 4 and 24h after treatment. IL6 is shown at left on an independent y -

axis scale . Each dot represents measurement from one mouse. Data represent mean± SD. 

B-F. Serum c ytokines are measured by multiplex immunoassay as in A and grouped by 

functional class. 

G. Chemokines are measured by multiplex immunoassay as in A. Cxcl9 is shown at left on an 

independent y -axis scale (bottom panel) .

H. Serum IFN 2 protein levels at 4 h and 24 h after LNP or LNP -mIFNα2 administration 

measured by mouse IFNα2 -specific ELISA. 

LNP -mIFN 2 induces a transient and self -resolving intrapulmonary neutrophil response 

To assess the pathological changes in the lungs, H&E -stained lung sections were evaluated by 

board -certified pathologists . In untreated control mice, lung sections showed preserved alveolar 

architecture with mild emphysematous changes and evidence of poorly differentiated parenchymal 

malignancy consistent with CT26 metastatic disease (Fig. 3A). In LNP -treated mice, the 

histological appear ance at 4 h was largely unchanged, sections showed benign lung tissue or mild 

emphysematous changes (Fig. 3B). By 24 h after LNP treatment, mild to moderate emphysematous 

changes and focal perivascular lymphocytic infiltration were noted, without significa nt 

neutrophilia (Fig. 3C, left), consistent with very mild, resolving vehicle -related changes. 

LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice displayed a distinct, time -dependent neutrophil response. At 4 h, 

average intra -alveolar neutrophil counts were elevated approximately twice the control baseline 

and 2.6 -fold above the LNP 4 h level , indicating a robust but compartmentalized neutrophil influx 

into the alveolar space (Fig. 3B, 3D). Higher -magnification images of LNP -mIFNα2 -treated lungs 

at 4 h confirmed the presence of neutrophils , characterized by multi -lobed nuclei , accumulating 

within alveolar spaces (Fig. 3D ), adjacent to structurally intact bronchioles and pulmonary arteries, 

without evidence of vessel wall disruption, necrosis, diffuse alveolar damage, or parenchymal 

tissue injury. Despite the elevated neutrophil count, pathological evaluation noted no evid ence of 

tissue injury or inflammation at this timepoint. 

By 24 h post -LNP -mIFNα2 injection, alveolar neutrophil counts resolved substantially to a 

level that is comparable to the untreated control level , demonstrating rapid clearance of the early 

neutrophil influx (Fig. 3C, 3E). Histologically, LNP -mIFNα2 -treated lungs at 24 h showed only 

mild emphysematous changes in some sections, with benign lung tissue in others, and no evidence 

of persistent tissue injury or inflammation. LNP -mIFNα2 boost therapy induced a similar 

pathological change in tumor -bearing mo use lungs (Fig. 3A-D). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

Figure 3 . LNP -mIFNα2 induces a transient and self -resolving alveolar neutrophil influx. 

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14 

A. Representative H&E -stained lung section from an untreated control CT26 metastasis -bearing 

mouse. Yellow arrow: Pulmonary arteries ; Blue arrow: bronchioles .

B-C. Representative H&E -stained lung sections at 4 (B) and 24 (C) hours after LNP (left) and 

LNP -mIFNα2 (right) treatment .

D. Higher -magnification H&E images of representative lung sections from LNP -treated (left) 

and LNP -mIFNα2 -treated (right) mice at 4 h post -treatment. Black circles indicate 

neutrophils. Blue arrow: bronchiole. Yellow arrow: pulmonary artery. With intact vesse l wall 

and no evidence of vasculitis or endothelial disruption. Circle: neutrophils located within the 

alveolar space. 

E. Quantification of average intra -alveolar neutrophil counts per 10 HPF across all experimental 

groups as indicated. Each data point represents one mouse (n=4 per group). Data represent 

mean ± SD. 

To validate the histological neutrophil influx, flow cytometry was performed on tumor -bearing 

lungs after prime and boost treatment . LNP -mIFNα2 increased neutrophil frequencies at 4 h post -

prime and post -boost, returning toward baseline by 24 h (Fig. S4A -H). This complimentary cell -

based quantification confirms the transient, self -resolving neutrophil response observed by H&E 

histopath ology. 

Collectively, the pathological and flow cytometric analyses demonstrate that LNP -mIFNα2 

immunotherapy induces a transient alveolar neutrophil influx that peaks at 4 h and resolves by 24h 

after both prime and boost dosing, without tissue injury, diffu se alveolar damage, vascular 

disruption, or persistent pulmonary inflammation (Fig. 3, S3, S4). The convergence of histological 

and flow cytometric findings across two complementary approaches confirms that this neutrophil 

response is robust, reproducible, and self -limiting. This profile is consistent with the serum 

cytokine data (Fig. 2, S2) showing a self -resolving innate immune response and supports the 

tolerability of LNP -mIFNα2 for repeat intravenous dosing. 

LNP -mIFNα2 induces antitumor efficacy through IFNAR1 signaling .

Systemic administration of mRNA -LNPs elicits a viraemia -like surge in IFN -I and innate 

immune activation 19 . However, LNP -mediated delivery of plasmid DNA (pDNA) introduces an 

additional layer of innate immune stimulation, driving rapid production of IFN -I and pro -

inflammatory cytokine IL6 44 . We therefore hypothesized that LNP -encapsulated murine IFNα2 

(LNP -mIFNα2), which delivers a pDNA transgene encoding IFNα2, would engage both the innate 

response inherent to pDNA delivery and the direct IFNAR1 -mediated antitumor activity of the 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

encoded IFNα2 protein, and that this dual mechanism of IFN -I induction would confer superior 

antimetastatic efficacy. At 4 h after injection, LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice showed elevated serum 

levels of IL6, GM -CSF, TNFα, IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, Cxcl9, CXCL10, IL10, and IL17A compared 

with untreated controls, with most cytokines declining substantially by 24 h. Notably, LNP -

Vector -treated mice also displayed measurable cytokine induction above baseline at 4h (Fig. 4A). 

This inflammatory response elicited by the empty vector LNP -pDNA is consistent with cGAS -

STING -mediated sensing of the encapsulated plasmid DNA backbone, which drives IFN -I

production independently of transgene expression 44,51 . In line with active IFNα2 transgene 

expression, serum IFNα2 protein was significantly elevated only in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice at 

4 h and remained detectable at 24 h, whereas LNP -Vector -treated animals showed no measurable 

IFNα2 protein (Fig. 4B), confir ming that LNP -mIFNα2 drives a quantitatively and qualitatively 

distinct interferon response beyond baseline pDNA -mediated innate activation. 

To assess whether the augmented interferon response of LNP -mIFNα2 translates into 

antitumor efficacy, we quantified pulmonary metastatic burden following treatment at Day 3 or 

Day 5 post -tumor injection, representing early and late metastatic stages, respectively (Fig. 4C). 

At both time points, LNP -Vector and LNP -mIFNα2 significantly reduced lung metastatic nodule 

counts compared with LNP control. The therapeutic advantage of LNP -mIFNα2 over LNP -Vector 

was pronounced at Day 5, a time point that mimics high tumor burden in the clinical setting, 

suggesting that robust transgene -driven IFNα2 expression and direct IFNAR1 signaling are 

especially critical when the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment is more established, 

consistent with observations tha t mRNA -LNP -induced IFN -I is required to sensitize 

immunologically cold tumors to checkpoint blockade 19 . To confirm IFNAR1 dependence, mice 

were treated with anti -IFNAR1 blocking antibody during treatment (Fig. 4D). IFNAR1 blockade 

diminished the antitumor effect of LNP -Vector and LNP -mIFNα2. These results demonstrate that 

the antitumor efficacy of LNP -Vect or and LNP -mIFNα2 is dependent on canonical IFNAR1 

signaling and is quantitatively superior to the cGAS -STING -mediated baseline inflammatory 

response to the vector backbone, particularly under conditions of high tumor burden. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Figure 4 . LNP -mIFNα2 suppresses CT26 pulmonary metastases through IFNAR1 signaling 

and is associated with IL6 induction. 

A. Serum cytokine profiles in CT26 metastases -bearing mice. Mice were treated intravenously 

with lipid nanoparticle (LNP) -encapsulated empty vector (LNP -Vector) or LNP -encapsulated 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

murine IFNα2 (LNP -mIFNα2). Serum concentrations of IL6 , GM -CSF, TNFα, IL -10, IFNα, 

IFNβ, IFNγ, IL -17A, Cxcl9, and Cxcl10 were measured at 4 h and 24 h after treatment. Data 

are shown as mean ± SD. 

B. Serum IFNα2 protein levels in mice treated as in (A), measured at 4 h and 24 h after 

treatment. Data are shown as mean ± SD. 

C. Quantification of pulmonary metastatic nodule number in CT26 metastases -bearing mice 

treated with LNP, LNP -Vector, or LNP -mIFNα2 administered at Day 3 or Day 5 after tumor 

cell injection. Each dot represents one mouse. Data are shown as mean ± SD. 

D. Quantification of pulmonary metastatic nodule number in CT26 metastases -bearing mice 

treated with LNP -Vector or LNP -mIFNα2 in the presence of IgG or anti -IFNAR1 monoclonal 

antibody. Each dot represents one mouse. Data are shown as mean ± SD. 

E. Quantification of pulmonary metastatic nodule number in CT26 metastases -bearing mice 

treated with LNP or LNP -mIFNα2. The LNP -mIFNα2 -treated group was further divided and 

treated with IgG or anti -IL6 neutralizing monoclonal antibody administered once prior to 

LNP -mIFNα2 treatment. Each dot represents one mouse. Data are shown as mean ± SD. 

Neutralization of IL6 enhances LNP -mIFNα2 antitumor therapeutic activity 

Among the cytokines transiently induced by LNP -mIFNα2, IL6 was among the most 

significantly elevated at 4 h and rapidly resolved by 24 h (Fig. 4A). This acute IL6 surge is 

characteristic of pDNA -LNP -induced inflammation driven by cGAS -STING activatio n, which 

prominently upregulates IL6 44 . To determine the functional consequence of this transient IL6 

response on antitumor activity, we treated CT26 metastases -bearing mice with LNP -mIFNα2 in 

combination with either isotype control (IgG) or an anti -IL6 neutralizing monoclonal antibody 

adminis tered once prior to LNP -mIFNα2 (Fig. 4E). Neutralization of IL6 significantly enhanced 

the antitumor efficacy of LNP -mIFNα2, resulting in a further reduction of pulmonary metastatic 

nodule counts compared with LNP -mIFNα2+IgG controls. These observations in dicate that the 

transient IL6 surge induced by LNP -mIFNα2 is not required for its antitumor effect and may 

instead dampen therapeutic activity, a known downstream consequence of acute IL6 elevation in 

the tumor microenvironment 52 . Blocking this IL6 burst therefore unmasks an augmented antitumor 

response, positioning transient IL6 as a modulatable liability of pDNA -LNP -based IFNα2 therapy. 

Together, these findings suggest that co -administration of IL6 blockade with LNP -mIFNα2 

represe nts a rational combinatorial strategy to maximize the antimetastatic efficacy of IFN -I-based 

nanoparticle targeted immunotherapy. 

LNP -mIFNα2 broadly reprograms the tumor -infiltrating immune compartments toward an 

antitumor immune phenotype 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

To probe the effect of LNP -mIFNα2 on the tumor microenvironment (TME), we isolated 

CD45 + cells from CT26 tumor lung metastases (Fig. S5A & B) and performed single cell RNA 

sequencing (scRNAseq). After integration and clustering, cells were annotated into major immune 

and residual stromal populations based on differentially expressed genes and canonical marker 

genes (Fig. S5C -F). Inspection of the split UMAP and proportion plot revealed striking differences 

in both the proportion of monocytes versus ma crophages and in the composition of the T cell 

compartment between conditions (Fig. 5A & B). In the LNP control tumor, there were high Tumor -

associated Macrophages (TAMs) and low Ly6 + inflammatory monocytes. In contrast, the LNP -

mIFNα2 -treated tumor harbored low TAMs and high monocytes. We also observed an expansion 

of Tpex -like T cells in the LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumor. To investigate these differences at higher 

resolution, we separatel y subclustered the monocyte/macrophage and T cell compartments. 

LNP -mIFNα2 reprogrammed the monocyte/macrophage compartment in lung metastasis .

To probe the effect of LNP -mIFNα2 on the tumor microenvironment (TME), we isolated CD45 +

cells from CT26 tumor lung metastases (Fig. S5A & B) and performed single cell RNA sequencing 

(scRNAseq). After integration and clustering, cells were annotated into major immune and residual 

stromal populations based on differentially expressed genes and canonical marker genes (Fig. S5C -

F) . Inspection of the split UMAP and proportion plot revealed striking differences in both the 

proportion of monocytes versus macrophages and in the composition of the T cell compartment 

between conditions (Fig. 5A, B). In the LNP control tumor, there were high Tumor -associated 

Macrophages (TAMs) and low Ly6 + inflammatory monocytes. In contrast, the LNP -mIFN α2-

treated tumor harbored low TAMs and high monocytes. We also observed an expansion of Tpex -

like T cells in the LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumor. To investigate these differences at higher 

resolution, we separately subclustered the monocyte/macrophage and T cell compartments. 

LNP -mIFNα2 reprogrammed the monocyte/macrophage compartment in lung metastasis .

The three monocyte/macrophage clusters from the overall UMAP (Ly6 + Inflammatory 

Monocytes, Macrophages, and Tumor -Associated Macrophages) were subsetted and re -clustered. 

Non -myeloid clusters identified by expression of lineage -specific markers were excluded prior to 

downstream analysis (Fig. S6A, B). The remaining clust ers were annotated into 12 cell types using 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

a combination of differential gene expression, canonical marker genes, and pairwise DEG analysis 

between selected clusters (Fig. S6C). 

Quantification of myeloid subtype proportions revealed that the broad shift from macrophages 

to monocytes observed in the overall UMAP (Fig. 5A, B) was attributable specifically to a 

reduction in Hypoxic SPP1 TAMs, a population of myeloid cell with po tent immune suppressive 

function 53 -56 , and Lipid -associated TAMs, with a corresponding increase in Inflammatory and 

Patrolling Monocytes in the LNP -mIFNα2 group (Fig. 5C, D). In the LNP control, Patrolling 

Monocytes, Inflammatory Monocytes, and Hypoxic SPP1 TAMs all expressed higher levels o f

Arginase 1 ( Arg1 ), a key immunosuppressive enzyme in the TME. Hypoxic SPP1 TAMs 

additionally expressed higher levels of Spp1 in LNP control tumors. We have previously shown 

that IRF8 represses Spp1 expression in myeloid cells 28 . Given that LNP -mIFNα2 elevates type I 

IFN levels in the TME, IRF8 -mediated transcriptional repression of Spp1 in myeloid cells may 

represent a key mechanism of LNP -mIFNα2 efficacy. Consistent with this, Spp1 expression was 

globally repressed across myeloid cells in the LNP -mIFNα2 group (Fig. S6G ). Hypoxic SPP1 

TAMs in the LNP -mIFNα2 group additionally downregulated suppressive markers including 

Trem2 and Arg1 , and upregulated IFN -response genes to among the highest levels of any myeloid 

subtype (Fig. 5C, Fig. S6G -I). 

The striking reduction in Hypoxic SPP1 TAMs in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors prompted us 

to investigate the fate of these cells. We hypothesized that SPP1 TAMs in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated 

tumors were undergoing apoptosis . We compared apoptotic gene expression in SPP1 TAMs 

between conditions (Fig. 5D). SPP1 TAMs exhibited meaningfully higher apoptotic module scores 

in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors compared to LNP controls (Fig. 5D), suggesting that LNP -

mIFNα2 drives both trans criptional programming and apoptotic elimination of this 

immunosuppressive population. 

In the Inflammatory Monocytes cluster, distinguished from Patrolling Monocytes by 

expression of Sell , Itga4 , Prtn3 , Mmp8 , and Fn1 , while Patrolling Monocytes expressed Itgax ,

Cd300e , Lilra5 , Cd36 , and Vegfc (Fig. S6C), LNP -mIFNα2 induced upregulation of interferon -

inducible GTPase Lgp1 and granzyme Gzma (Fig. 5C). Further analysis confirmed high expression 

of canonical IFN -response genes in the Inflammatory Monocytes of LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors 

(Fig. S6F). Co -expression of Prtn3 , Elane , and Mmp8 in t his population is consistent with 

emergency myelopoiesis generating granulocyte -monocyte precursor -derived monocytes that are 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

subsequently reinforced toward an IFN -responsive identity by the LNP -mIFNα2 treatment . Direct 

comparison of the two monocyte clusters confirmed their distinct identities, with Inflammatory 

Monocytes enriched for granule and emergency myelopoiesis transcripts and Patrolling 

Monocytes enriched for patrolling/scavenger markers (Fig. S6I ). 

LNP -mIFNα2 expanded the CD8 Tpex compartment and relieved Tpex quiescence 

The elimination of SPP1 TAMs and emergence of IFN -responsive monocytes, which are 

known to stimulate T cells in tumors 57,58 , in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors prompted us to examine 

whether myeloid reprogramming was accompanied by favorable changes in the T cell 

compartment. The six T cell clusters from the overall UMAP were subsetted and re -clustered using 

the same pipeline as for the myeloid compartment. Non -T cell clusters were identified and 

excluded (Fig. S7A, B) and the remaining cells were integrated using Harmony prior to final 

cluster annotation (Fig. S7C -F). LNP -mIFNα2 expanded the total T cell compartment (Fig. 5E). 

LNP -mIFNα2 induced significant changes in T cell subtype composition (Fig. 5F & G). 

Terminally exhausted CD8 T cells (CD8 Tex -term) were reduced in the treatment group, while 

progenitor -exhausted CD8 T cells (CD8 Tpex), the subtype known to expand an d respond to anti -

PD -1 immunotherapy, increased approximately two -fold in number (Fig. 5G). Effector Tregs 

(eTregs) were reduced in LNP -mIFNα2, and Naïve CD4 T cells, γδ T cells, and Proliferating T 

cells were expanded (Fig. 5G). DEG analysis of the remaining T cell subtypes (CD8 Tex -interm), 

Tpex -early, eTregs, and IL17 + γδ T cells) similarly revealed upregulation of IFN -stimulated genes 

in the LNP -mIFNα2 group (Fig. 5H, Fig. S7G, Fig S8A). DEG analysis of the CD8 Tpex cluster 

revealed that in LNP control tumors, CD8 Tpex are maintained in a quiescent state, characterized 

by elevated e xpression of the mRNA destablizer Zfp36l2 , the metabolic checkpoint Txnip , and the 

immunosuppressive enzyme Arg1 (Fig. 5H, Fig. S8A). LNP -mIFNα2 relieved this quiescent state 

and directed CD8 Tpex toward and IFN -response phenotype, evidenced by significant 

upregulation of IFN -stimulated genes Ifi27l2a and Ly6a (Fig. 5H). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Figure 5 . LNP -mIFN 2 reshapes the tumor immune microenvironment in lung metastases. 

A. UMAP of CD45+ tumor -infiltrating immune cells split by LNP control vs. LNP -mIFNα2. 

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint 22 

B. Stacked bar chart showing the proportion of cell types in the scRNAseq samples. 

C. UMAP split by sample of re -clustered monocyte/macrophage subtypes (original UMAP 

clusters: Ly6 + Inflammatory monocytes, Macrophages, Tumor -Associated Macrophages). 

D. Stacked bar chart showing the proportion of cell types from (C). 

E. Volcano plots of differentially expressed genes in LNP control or LNP -mIFNα2. in the 

indicated re -clustered myeloid cells 

F. Violin plot of apoptosis module score of Hypoxic SPP1 TAMs between LNP control and 

LNP -mIFNα2. Wilcoxon rank -sum test (pseudoreplication). 

G. Bar plot showing the total number of T cells in each scRNAseq sample. 

H. UMAP split by sample of re -clustered T cell subtypes (original UMAP clusters: CD8 Tex -

intermediate, eTregs, IL -17 -producing gd T cells, Naïve/Stem -like CD8 T cells (Tpex -early), 

Tgd cells, Tpex -like T cells). 

I. Stacked bar chart showing the proportion of cell types from (H). 

J. Bar plots showing the absolute number of each re -clustered T cell subtype split by sample. 

K. Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes in the CD8 Tpex cluster in LNP control or 

mIFNα2. 

LNP -mIFNα2 expands cytotoxic NK cell subsets and drives an IFN -stimulated gene 

signature across the B cell compartment. 

In addition to the myeloid and T cell compartments, LNP -mIFNα2 reprogrammed the 

intratumoral B and NK cell populations. B cells showed proportional shifts toward Plasma Cells 

and mature B cell states in the LNP -mIFNα2 group, and differential gene expression analysis of 

the major B cell subsets, including IgD +CD20 + naive mature B cells, naive B cells, plasma cells, 

and mature naive B cells, demonstrated consistent upregulation of interferon -stimulated genes 

across all subsets following LNP -mIFNα2 treatment (Fig. S8B). Activated NK cells and 

Proliferating Cytotoxic NK cells, identified from the overall UMAP, were both substantially 

expanded in proportion and in absolute number in the LNP -mIFNα2 group relative to LNP control 

(Fig. S9A-C). Differential gene expression analysis of these two NK subsets revealed broad 

upregulation of IFN -stimulated and cytotoxic effector transcripts in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors 

(Fig. S9D), consistent with the cytolytic reprogramming observed across other immune 

compartments. Together with the myeloid and T cell findings, these data indicate that LNP -

mIFNα2 broadly reprograms the tu mor immune microenvironment across innate and adaptive 

lymphoid compartments to promote antitumor immunity. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

LNP -mIFNα2 depletes high cycling tumor cell s and reverses cuproptosis -resistance 

programs in tumor cells 

To characterize the direct effects of LNP -mIFN  on tumor and stromal cell populations in the 

CT26 lung metastatic niche, we performed scRNAseq on the CD45 - cells from LNP - and LNP -

mIFNα2 -treated mice. Because the LNP -mIFNα2 -treated samples has shrinked tumor cells and 

enriched immune cells, CD45 + cells were removed by CD45 thresholding prior to analysis (LNP: 

20,947 cells; LNP -mIFNα2: 7,097 cells after filtering, Fig. S10A & B ). Supervised clustering 

resolved seven transcriptionally distinct populations (Fig. 6A & B), which were annotated based 

on mouse colon tumor marker genes 59 . UMAP visualization and proportional composition analysis 

revealed striking LNP -mIFNα2 -driven remodeling of the tumor cell landscape: the proportion of 

High Cycling C was markedly reduced in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors, while the proportion of 

IFN Response CC was substantially increased (Fig. 6A -B). 

Module scoring confirmed the compositional shifts observed by UMAP: the high cycling score 

was highest in High Cycling CC and was broadly reduced in LNP -mIFNα2, while the IFN response 

score was observed more broadly across cell populations (Fig. 6C). The expression of SPP1 , an 

oncogenic driver in cancer cells 60,61 , was decreased across all tumor subtypes in LNP -mIFNα2 -

treated mice (Fig. 6D). In addition, tumor cells in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice showed remodeled 

chemokine expression consistent with enhanced antitumor immune recruitment. Ccl5 , Cxcl9 , Ccl4 ,

Cx3cl1 , and Cxcl6 , which broadly recruit NK cells, dendritic cells, and CD8 + T cells, were elevated 

in the treatment group (Fig. 6E, Fig. S10D & E ). To interrogate the functional consequence of 

chemokine expression remodeling, we performed receptor -ligand interaction analysis using 

CellChat, restricting the sender role to tumor cell subtypes. The tumor -cell derived chemokine 

network was substantially expanded in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mice relative to LNP controls, with 

all tumor cell subtypes showing increased number and strength of interactions with immune cell 

populations (Fig. 6F). 

Given that IFN signaling axis has recently been shown to directly transactivate FDX1 and 

sensitize tumor cells to cuproptosis and overcome tumor cell resistance to cuproptosis 62 -65 , we 

asked whether LNP -mIFNα2 engages this pathway in tumor cells. Across tumor cell subtypes, 

LNP -mIFNα2 treatment increased expression of upstream IFN -signaling components ( Jak1 ,

Ifngr1 , Stat2 , Irf9 ) and the canonical IRF1 -dependent MHC I antigen -presentation program 

(Tap1/2 , Psmb8/9 , B2m , H2 -K1/D1 ) (Fig. 6G). This was accompanied by a consistent increase in 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Fdx1 , the rate -limiting cuproptosis effector and direct IRF1 transcriptional target, across all tumor 

cell subtypes (Fig. 6H). A reciprocal and broad decrease in the copper -sequestering 

metallothionein Mt1 (Fig. 6H) and downregulation ofHif1a -regulated curroptosis -resistance 

signature (Fig. 6I) was also observed in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated tumors (Fig. 6I) . This Fdx1 -up/Mt1 -

down configuration is the converse of the signature associated with cuproptosis resistance in IFN -

experienced tumors, in which BACH1 loss de -represses MT1E/MT1X to blunt cuproptosis despite 

active STAT1 -IRF1 signaling 62,64,65 . Together with our finding that LNP -mIFNα2 increases 

copper -importer expression ( Slc31a1 , Slc31a2 ) across tumor subtypes (Fig. 6H), these data 

suggest that LNP -mIFNα2 -induced IFN signaling sensitize tumor cells to coproptosis, raising the 

possibility that cuproptosis represents a previously unappreciated layer of tumor -intrinsic 

reprogramming by IFNα2 therapy. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Figure 6. mIFNα2 transgene therapy driv es depletion of high cycling cancer cell and 

reverses cuproptosis -resistance programs in tumor cells .

A. UMAP of all CD45 − cells colored by annotated cluster identity split by sample. 

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26 

B. Stacked proportion bar plot of tumor cell populations as in (A). 

C. Feature plots of module scores for proliferation, hypoxia, IFN response, and mesenchymal 

gene programs. 

D. Violin plots split by sample of SPP1 .

E. Violin plots split by sample of Chemokine expression genes 

F. CellChat circle plots of chemokine network specifically/only showing tumor cells as the 

senders of LNP control (left) and LNP -mIFN 2 (right) 

G. DotPlot of IFN signal transduction genes and MHC I antigen -presentation genes across tumor 

cell subtypes, comparing LNP -mIFNα2 to LNP. Dot color indicates average log2 fold -change 

(LNP -mIFNα2 vs. LNP); dot size indicates the percentage of cells expressing each gene in the 

LNP -mIFNα2 group. 

H. Bar plot of average log2 fold -change (LNP -mIFNα2 vs LNP) for core cuproptosis pathway 

genes across the same tumor subtypes, grouped by function: copper import, the 

lipoylation/Hif axis, and copper sequestration. 

I. Bar plot of average log2 fold -change (LNP -mIFNα2 vs LNP) of genes of cuproptosis -

resistance signature in the indicated tumor cell subtypes. 

The immune landscape of LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mouse tumors transcriptionally 

recapitulates the T cell and myeloid expansion signatures of PD -1 blockade responding 

human cancer patients 

To determine whether LNP -mIFNα2 -induced immune reprogramming in mouse tumors 

recapitulates human immunotherapy response programs, we analyzed a publicly available scRNA -

seq dataset from breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant pembrolizumab 66 . Patients were 

stratified into T cell clonotype expanders (E), those exhibiting clonal T cell expansion upon 

pembrolizumab treatment, and non -expanders (NE), providing a human benchmark for 

immunotherapy -responsive versus -resistant tumor immune microenvi ronments. Analysis of the 

human T cell compartment resolved ten distinct phenotypes by UMAP, including Cytotoxic 

Effector CD8 +, Tpex, IFN -stimulated T cells, and Proliferating T cells, all of which were enriched 

in E patients (Fig. 7A). Conversely, Naive/S tem -like CD8 + and Treg populations predominated in 

NE patients. Boxplot quantification confirmed significant enrichment of Tpex/Follicular and 

Proliferating T cells in E patients, along with Cytotoxic Effector and Terminal/Exhausted CD8 +

subsets (Fig. 7B). Volcano plot analysis of the Tpex population revealed upregulation of effector 

and cytotoxic genes, including PRF1 , GZMB , NKG7 , IFNG , and CXCL13 , in E patients, closely 

mirroring the gene programs upregulated in LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mouse CD8 T cells, where 

Gzmb , Nkg7 , Prf1 , and Ccl5 were induced and Tpex -early populations expanded markedly (Fig. 

7B). 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Figure 7. LNP -mIFNα2 -treated mouse tumors transcriptionally recapitulate the T cell and 

myeloid responder phenotypes associated with response to pembrolizumab in 

human cancer patients. 

A. Human T cell compartment analysis. Left: UMAP of T/NK cells from all patients colored by 

annotated phenotype, resolving ten distinct subpopulations Center: same UMAP colored by 

expansion status (E =orange; NE =blue ). Right: Stacked proportion bar chart showing the 

relative contribution of each T cell phenotype in E vs NE patients. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

B. Quantitative analysis of human T cell subpopulation proportions and differential gene 

expression. Left: boxplots of comparison of the indicated T cell subpopulations between E 

(orange) and NE (blue) patients. Right: Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes in the 

Tpex/Follicular population comparing E (right, orange) vs. NE (left, blue) patients. 

C. Human myeloid compartment analysis. Left: UMAP of myeloid cells colored by annotated 

phenotype, resolving seven populations. Center: same UMAP colored by expansion status 

(E =orange ; NE =blue ). Right: Stacked proportion bar chart comparing myeloid subpopulation 

composition between E and NE patients. 

D. Boxplot quantification of myeloid subpopulation proportions comparing E (orange) and NE 

(blue) patients. Boxes indicate median ± interquartile range .

In the myeloid compartment, analysis resolved seven macrophage/myeloid phenotypes. E 

patients were enriched for IFN -stimulated macrophages and transitional monocytes, while NE 

patients were dominated by complement macrophages (Fig. 7C, D). These findi ngs directly 

parallel our mouse LNP -mIFNα2 data: the depletion of immunosuppressive TAMs expressing 

SPP1 , Arg1 , and C1q , corresponding to the NE -associated complement macrophage phenotype, 

and compensatory expansion of Ly6 + inflammatory monocytes with ISG signatures mirroring the 

E-associated IFN -stimulated macrophage phenotype (Fig. 7C, D). 

Taken together , these cross -species analyses demonstrate that LNP -mIFNα2 shifts the tumor 

immune microenvironment into a state transcriptionally and compositionally mirroring the 

immunotherapy -responsive expander phenotype, expanding cytotoxic and progenitor exhausted T

cell subsets while eliminating inhibitory macrophage populations and enriching IFN -stimulated 

myeloid subsets , thereby establishing a translational link between LNP -mIFNα2 -driven 

reprogramming in mice and effective immunotherapy respon ses in human cancer. 

DISCUSSION 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Most CRC remain refractory to PD -(L) 1-based ICI immunotherapy 4. We show that LNP -

mIFNα2 overcomes this resistance through multi -compartment reprogramming of the tumor 

microenvironment, captured here at single -cell resolution across the myeloid, T, NK, B, and tumor 

cell compartments. Within the myeloid compartment, LNP -mIFNα2 collapsed 

immunosuppressive Hypoxic SPP1 + TAMs and Lipid -associated TAMs while expanding 

Inflammatory and Patrolling Monocytes bearing strong interferon -stimulated gene signatures. We 

have previously shown that tumor PD -L1 engages myeloid PD -1 to repress IFN -I and impair 

CXCL9 -dependent T cell re cruitment 28 and restoring IFN 2 via lipid nanoparticle delivery of 

IFNa2 transgene suppress tumor growth 47 . T he present mechanistic data indicate that restoring 

IFN -I directly reverses this circuit, driving IRF8 -associated repression of SPP1 and apoptotic 

clearance of SPP1 + TAMs rather than their simple reprogramming 67 . The resulting shift away from 

a complement/ SPP1 -high macrophage state toward an ISG -high monocyte state directly parallels 

the myeloid phenotype that distinguishes pembrolizumab responders from non -responders in 

human breast cancer 66 , reinforcing the myeloid compartment as a primary, rather than bystander, 

effector of IFNα2 -driven tumor growth control. 

This myeloid remodeling was accompanied by relief of CD8 Tpex quiescence: LNP -mIFNα2 

reduced expression of the quiescence -associated Zfp36l2, Txnip, and Arg1 program and redirected 

Tpex cells toward an ISG -high state, with a two -fold expansion of this progenitor -exhausted subset 

that is mechanistically linked to anti -PD -1 responsiveness 68 . Terminally exhausted CD8 T cells 

and effector Tregs, which are linked to resistance to PD -1 blockade immunotherapy 69,70 , contracted 

in parallel, while proliferating and γδ T cells expanded. NK cells showed comparable 

reprogramming, with both activated and proliferating cytotoxic subsets expanding alongside 

upregulated cytotoxic effector transcripts, and B cells shifted tow ard plasma cell and mature states 

with broadly elevated ISG expression. Together, these compartment -level changes show that IFN -

I restoration acts cell -autonomously across innate and adaptive lymphoid lineages to convert an 

exhausted, suppressive infiltrat e into a cytolytic one. 

A further layer of reprogramming occurred within tumor cells themselves. LNP -mIFNα2 

depleted the high -cycling tumor cell state and broadly induced IRF7 - and IRF8 -associated IFN 

signaling across all tumor subtypes, with consequent upregulation of MHC -I antigen presentation 

machinery and immune -recruiting chemokines that expanded tumor -immune cell connectivity in 

CellChat analysis. Within this same dataset, tumor cells showed a transcriptional pattern consistent 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

with relief of the hypoxia/HIF -1α -driven cuproptosis -resistance program 64 : reduced HIF -1α and 

glycolytic gene expression, increased copper -importer expression, and reduced copper -

sequestering metallothionein, mirroring the reversal of the BACH1 -MT1E/X resistance axis in 

cuproptosis and consistent with the foundational cuproptosis mechanism 62,63,65 . This tumor -

intrinsic IFN -cuproptosis crosstalk represents a previously unappreciated layer of LNP -mIFNα2 

action that warrants further functional study .

A key mechanistic finding is that antitumor efficacy strictly required canonical IFNAR1 

signaling: anti -IFNAR1 blockade abrogated the effect of LNP -mIFNα2, establishing that efficacy 

derives from the encoded IFNα2 protein rather than only cGAS -STING sensing of the plasmid 

backbone 51 . The transient IL6 surge induced by LNP -mIFNα2, a known consequence of cGAS -

STING activation 44 , attenuated rather than supported antitumor efficacy . Single -dose IL6 

neutralization prior to treatment further reduced metastatic burden, identifying IL6 as a

modulatable liability rather than a required component of the antitumor response, and supporting 

anti -IL6 co -administration as a rational combination strategy. 

The LNP -pDNA -associated proinflammatory cytokine and neutrophil profiles remained 

transient and self -resolved rapidly. T he systemic cytokine response was dominated by IFN -I and 

IFN -driven chemokines (CXCL10, XCL1, CXCL9) rather than broad pro -inflammatory cytokines 

(IL1α, IL1β, TNFα, GM -CSF), and the transient intrapulmonary neutrophil influx resolved fully 

by 24 hours with out tissue injury, including upon repeat boost dosing. This toxicity profile is 

consistent with findings made in cell -based IFN 2 gene therapy in human cancer patients 45 .

Elevated IL6 and GM -CSF in CRC patient serum relative to healthy donors further supports the 

rationale for IL6 co -blockade in this population. 

The recent first -in -human clinical trial with Temferon, a genetically engineered autologous 

hematopoietic stem cell product that generates tumor -infiltrating myeloid progeny to deliver 

IFNα2 gene therapy locally within the glioblastoma microenvironme nt 45 , provides important 

clinical validation of the central premise of our study that restoring tumor -restricted IFN -I activity 

reprograms a myeloid -dominant, immunosuppressive TME toward antitumor immune activation 

without provoking systemic toxicity. That tr ial achieved durable local IFNα2 exposure and a shift 

of tumor -associated macrophages toward inflammatory, interferon -stimulated gene -high states 45 ,

mirroring the myeloid reprogramming we observe with LNP -mIFNα2 in colon tumor lung 

metastases, but required ex vivo lentiviral transduction of CD34 + cells, myeloablative 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

conditioning, and manufacturing process inherent to autologous cell therapy. LNP -mIFNα2 

achieves a conceptually convergent outcome, coordinated, multi -compartment reprogramming of 

myeloid, T, NK, B, and tumor cell states toward an immunotherapy -responsive phenotype, through 

a single intravenous injection of an off -the -shelf nanoparticle formulation. This positions LNP -

mIFNα2 as a readily scalable and repeatable alternative strategy for tumor -targeted IFN -I

restoration . The convergence of independent local I FN -I gene therapy strategies, one cell -based 

and intracranial, the other nanoparticle -based, on overlapping myeloid and lymphoid 

reprogramming outcomes across two distinct, immunologically cold tumor types strengthens the 

rationale that tumor IFN -I restora tion is a generalizable strategy for overcoming myeloid -driven 

immunotherapy resistance, and supports LNP -mIFNα2 for clinical translation in metastatic CRC. 

METHODS 

Cell lines. The murine colon carcinoma cell line CT26 and the human colon adenocarcinoma 

cell line SW620 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC , Manassas, 

VA ). The MC38 -met cell line, a metastatic variant of the MC38 murine colon adenocarcinoma 

selected for efficient pulmonary colonization, was maintained in culture as previously described 

> 28

. All cell lines were cultured in RPMI -1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°C 

in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator . Cell lines wer e tested bimonthly for mycoplasma and 

mycoplasma -negative at time of experiments. 

Reagents . The following monoclonal antibodies were used for in vivo treatment: anti -mouse PD -

1 (clone RMP1 -14, Bio X Cell , Lebanon, NH ), Nivolumab ( BioXCell ), anti -mouse IFNAR1 

blocking antibody (clone MAR1 -5A3; Bio X Cell), anti -mouse IL6 neutralizing antibody, and 

corresponding isotype controls (BioXCell). 

LNP -mIFNα2 formulation. A codon -usage -optimized murine IFNα2 (mIFNα2) coding 

sequence was cloned into the NTC9385R nanoplasmid 71,72 (Aldevron /Nature Technology 

Corporation , Fargo, ND ). A codon -usage -optimized human IFNα2 ( hIFNα2) coding sequence 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

was cloned into NTC9385R . Nanoplasmid DNA was purified in Alde vron under endotoxin -free 

conditions . Clinical grade DOTAP -cholesterol (1:1) was provided by Genprex Corp (Austin, 

TX). LNP -mIFNα2 and LNP -hIFNα2 were formulated as previously described 47 .

Syngeneic experimental lung metastasis mouse models. CT26 cells (1.5x10 5 cells/mouse) or 

MC38 -met cells (3.5x10 5 cells/mouse) were suspended in 100 μl PBS and injected intravenously 

(i.v.) via the tail vein of female mice on day 0. Mice were randomized into treatment groups on 

the day of treatment. Treatments consisted of: LNP (control, empty lipid nanoparticles), a nti -PD -

1 monoclonal antibody (clone RMP1 -14, 200 μg/mouse i.p., every 3 days), LNP -mIFNα2 

(administered i.v. via tail vein, every 7 days), or LNP -mIFNα2 + anti -PD -1 combination. Two 

treatment start timepoints were evaluated: day 3 post -tumor injection (ear ly/low burden) and day 

5 post -tumor injection (late/high burden). Mice were euthanized at the experimental endpoint, 

lungs were inflated with ink to visualize tumor nodules as described 73 . All animal experiments 

were approved by Augusta University and VA Augusta Health Care System Institutional Animal 

Care and Use Committees (Protocols # 2008 -0162 and 22 -04 -134). 

Human colon cancer cell lung metastasis xenograft h umanized mouse model . NOD -scid 

IL2Rγ -null (NSG) male mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. Humanized mice 

were generated by intravenous injection of 3x 10 6 human peripheral blood mononuclear cells 

(PBMCs) isolated from health y man donor . Four days after PBMC engraftment, 3x10 6 SW620 

cells were injected i.v. to establish lung metastases. Beginning on Day 5 post -tumor inoculation, 

mice received LNP control, nivolumab ( 200 g/ mouse i.p., every 3 days), LNP -hIFNα2 (i.v., 

every 7 days), or (d) LNP -hIFNα2 + nivolumab combination. Mice were euthanized at the 

experimental endpoint and lungs were processed for nodule quantification as described above. 

IFNAR1 and IL6 Blockade Experiments . For IFNAR1 dependence studies, CT26 tumor -

bearing mice were administered anti -IFNAR1 blocking antibody (200 g/mouse i.p.) or isotype 

control IgG prior to LNP -mIFNα2 or LNP -Vector (NCT9385R nanoplasmid) treatment. For IL6 

neutralization experiments, anti -IL6 neutralizing monoclonal antibody or isotype control IgG 

was administered i.p. as a single dose approximately 1h prior to the first LNP -mIFNα2 injection. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

Pulmonary metastatic nodule counts were assessed at experimental endpoint as the primary 

efficacy readout. 

Transgene biodistribution and cell -type tropism. To determine the cellular tropism of LNP -

mIFNα2 in vivo, CT26 tumor -bearing mice were administered LNP -mIFNα2 i.v. and sacrificed 

2 days post -injection. Tumor -bearing lungs were enzymatically di gested with collagenase 

solution and distinct cell populations were isolated by fluorescence -activated cell sorting (FACS) 

using the following markers: CD45 -PD -L1 + cells (tumor cells ), CD3 + cells (T cells), and CD11b +

cells (myeloid cells). Sorted populations were lysed and RNA extracted. Transgene expression 

was det ected by PCR using primers specific to the codon -usage -optimized (cuo) mIFNα2 

sequence, which is specific for the cuo m IFNα2 , not the endogenous m IFNα2 47 . Transgene 

expression was normalized to the myeloid cell fraction, which was arbitrarily set to 1 as the 

reference comparator. 

IFN 2 protein pharmacokinetics. To characterize IFNα2 protein production kinetics, CT26 

tumor -bearing mice were administered LNP -mIFNα2 i.v. and sacrificed at serial timepoints: 4 

hours, 12 hours, and days 1, 2, 3, 6, and 9 post -injection. Blood was collected using a gel column 

and serum was isolated by centrifugation at 2,000 xg for 5 minutes and stored at -80°C until 

analysis. Tumor -bearing lung tissues were homogenized in total protein lysis buffer with 

protease inhibitor cocktail, clarified by centrifugation , and protein concentration determined by 

BCA assay. Serum and lung lysate IFNα2 protein levels were quantified by mouse IFNα2 -

specific ELISA (Cat# ab211648 Abcam, Cambridge , MA) following the manufacturer's 

instructions. This kit specifically detects mouse IFN 2 with no known cross reactivity to other 

mouse IFN  isoforms. IFNα2 protein level was calculated using R package 74 installed on R 

3.6.1 (https://www.r -project.org/). The limit of detection was calculated as an average of 

background samples plus 3 x SD. 

Prime treatment and cytokine analysis . CT26 tumor -bearing mice were treated with LNP, 

LNP -Vector, or LNP -mIFNα2. Serum was collected 4 hours and 24 hours after treatment. 

Detection of cytokines in serum or lysates was performed using LEGENDplex Mouse 

Inflammation Panel (TNFα, IFNγ, IL1 , IL1 , IL6 , IL10, IL17A, IL12p70, GM -CSF, IL -23, 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

IFN , MCP -1, IL27; BioLegend Cat# 740446), or Mouse Proinflammatory Chemokine Panel 

V02 (custom 2 -plex set for CXCL9 and CXCL10; BioLegend Cat# 741295) according to 

manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, serum samples were diluted 2 -fold with Assay Buffer and 

standards were mixed with Matrix Solution (Biolegend). For measurements in cell lysates, 

samples were diluted 4x with Assay Buffer and standards were appropriately mixed with the 

Lysis Buffer. Standards and samples were plated with capture beads and incuba ted overnight at 

4oC on plate shaker (350 rpm). After washing the plate, detection antibodies were added to each 

well and the plate was incubated on shaker (600 rpm) for 1h at room temperature. Finally, 

without washing, SA -PE was added and incubated for 30 min. Samples were acquired on 

Novocyte Quanteon flow cytometer (Agilent Technologies). Standard curves and protein 

concentration were calculated using R package 74 installed on R 3.6.1. The limit of detection was 

calculated as an average of background samples plus 3xSD. Assay and data calculations were 

performed at. Total IFN  was measured using Legendplex beads (Biolegend) that detect IFN 1, 

IFN 6, and IFN 9. 

Boost treatment cytokine analysis. To evaluate the cytokine response upon repeat LNP -

mIFNα2 administration, mice that had received a prime LNP -mIFNα2 treatment were re -dosed 

(boost) with LNP or LNP -mIFNα2 seven days after the prime dose. Serum was collected 4 and 

24 hours after the boost tr eatment and analyzed for the same cytokine/chemokine panel and 

IFNα2 protein as described for the prime treatment analysis. 

Human colorectal cancer patient serum cytokine analysis . Serum samples were collected 

from healthy adult donors in Augusta Shepeard Community Blood Center (n=10) and colorectal 

cancer patients in VA Augusta Health Care System (n=20) under institutional review board 

(IRB) -approved protocol with written informed consent (IRB Protocol# 1314554 -19). The same 

multiplexed cytokine/chemokine panel used for mouse serum analysis was applied to measure: 

pro -inflammatory cytokines ( IL6 , GMCSF, IL -1β, TNFα, IL -8); Th1 -associated cytokines 

(IFNα2, IL12p70, IFNγ, IL2, IFNα, IFNβ, IL28α, IFNL1); Th2 -associated cytokines (IL -4, IL -5, 

IL -9, IL -13); immunoregulatory cytokine IL10; Th17 -associated cytokines (IL17A, IL17F, 

IL22); and chemokines (CXCL10, CXCL5, and an extended c hemokine panel). Results were 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

compared between healthy donors and CRC patients by Mann -Whitney U test; p< 0.05 was 

considered statistically significant. 

Histopathological analysis . Lung tissues from untreated control, LNP -treated, and LNP -

mIFNα2 -treated CT26 tumor -bearing mice were collected at 4 hours and 24 hours post -

treatment. Fixed lungs were processed through graded alcohols, embedded in paraffin, and 

sectioned at 5 μm thicknes s. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) by 

standard protocols. H&E -stained sections were evaluated by two board -certified pathologists. 

The following parameters were assessed: alveolar architecture, evidence o f tissue injury (diffuse 

alveolar damage, necrosis), vascular integrity (vasculitis, endothelial disruption), perivascular 

inflammation, and intra -alveolar neutrophil content. Quantification of neutrophils was performed 

by counting neutrophils in 10 consec utive high -power fields (HPF, ×200 magnification) per 

section; average neutrophil count per 10 HPF was calculated for each animal. Statistical 

comparisons of neutrophil counts between treatment groups and timepoints were performed by 

one -way ANOVA with Tuk ey's post -hoc test. An analogous histopathological assessment was 

performed on lung tissues collected 4 and 24 hours after a second (boost) LNP -mIFNα2 dose 

administered 7 days after the prime treatment. 

Flow cytometry a nalysis . Tumor -bearing lungs were harvested and enzymatically dissociated 

using a collagenase solution ( 1 mg/ml collagenase, Cat#C0130, Collagenase, Sigma -Aldrich, 

MO; 0.1 mg/ml hyaluronidase, cat#H3506, Sigma -Aldrich; and 30 U/ml DNase I, cat#EN0531, 

Thermo) at room temperature for 1 h , followed by filtration through a 100 μm cell strainer. Red 

blood cells were lysed using ACK lysis buffer. Single -cell suspensions were washed in FACS 

buffer (PBS + 1% FBS) . For myeloid infiltrate characteriz ation, cells were stained with the 

following antibody panels: CD45 -FITC, CD11b -APC, Ly6G -PE. For flow cytometric 

quantification of immune cell subsets (4 hours and 24 hours post -prime and post -boost 

treatment), cells were acquired on a flow cytometer (BD F ortessa) and data analyzed using 

FlowJo v10. Gating strategies are shown in Figure S3 and described in detail therein. Cell 

populations are expressed as percentage of total CD45+ cells, percentage of CD11b+ cells, and 

as percentage of CD45+CD11b+CD11b− fra ctions . For cell sorting to assess transgene 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

biodistribution, FACS -purified populations (CD45 -PD -L1 +, CD3 +, CD11b +) were collected for 

RNA extraction. 

Single -cell RNA sequencing . CT26 tumor -bearing mice were treated with LNP control or LNP -

mIFNα2. At the experimental endpoint, tumor -bearing lungs were harvested and processed to 

single -cell suspensions as described above. CD45 + tumor -infiltrating immune cells were isolated 

by positive selection using CD45 nanobeads (Biolegend ) according to the manufacturer's 

protocol, achieving >95% purity as confirmed by post -selection flow cytometry. Cells were 

resuspended in PBS + 1% BSA. Cell viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion and wa s

>85% for all samples included in sequencing. Single -cell RNA -seq libraries were generated 

using the 10x Genomics Chromium platform. Raw BCL files were demultiplexed using Cell 

Ranger mkfastq v10.0.0. Gene expression was quantified per sample using Cell Ranger count 

v10.0.0 aligned to the GRCm39 -2024 -A mouse reference genome. All samples were normalized 

independently using SCTransform v2 (3,000 variable features, mitochondrial content regressed) 

and jointly integrated using Reciprocal PCA (RPCA) with SCT n ormalization across 50 

dimensions. PCA was performed on 100 components; the optimal number of PCs (49) was 

selected using variance -explained criteria (co1=78, co2=20). UMAP and tSNE embeddings were 

computed at 49 PCs. Clustering was performed at resolution s 0.1 -1.2; resolution 0.3 yielding 31 

clusters was selected as optimal based on Clustree stability analysis. The resulting integrated 

object served as the sole input for all downstream analysis without re -integration. 

scRNA -sequencing of immune cells . For the immune cell compartment, the integrated object 

was subset ted to purified CD45 + immune cells, preserving existing UMAP coordinates. 

Unsupervised clustering was performed to identify 31 clusters. Sub -UMAPs, proportion barplots, 

and count barplots were generated for T cells, NK cells, myeloid cells, and B cells. Cell clusters 

were annotated to major immune lineages and subpopulations by examination of canonical 

marker gene expression using DotPlot visualization of know n markers . Di fferentially expressed 

genes (DEGs) between LNP control and LNP -mIFNα2 -treated cells were identified within each 

annotated cell population using the Wilcoxon rank -sum test implemented in Seurat 

(FindMarkers), with a minimum log2 fold -change threshold of 0. 25 and minimum detection 

fraction of 0.1 in either group. Adjusted p -values were computed using Bonferroni correction. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

DEGs are visualized as single -cell heatmaps (log2 fold -change scale). Interferon -stimulated gene 

(ISG) expression was visualized by DotPlot, with dot size representing percentage of cells 

expressing each gene and color representing average scaled expressio n. Cell composition 

changes were quantified as proportional bar charts and absolute cell counts per annotated 

population across treatment conditions. 

sc RNA sequencing of tumor cell and stromal cells . To collect the non -immune cells, t he 

supernatant fractions of the CD45 + cell isolated samples above were loaded on top of 

lymphocyte separation medium ( Cat # 25 -072 -C1 , Mediatech Inc., Manassas, VA ) and 

centrifuges at 2000 RPM for 20 min. The live cells were collected at the interface, washed in 

PBS, and analyzed for tumor cell/epithelial cell enrichment by flow cytometry. Single -cell 

library construction and sequencing were performed as described for the CD45 + compartment .

Raw data were processed using Cell Ranger and analyzed in Seurat using the same pipeline as 

the immune compartment. The LNP -mIFNα2 -treated samples contain only ~30% CD45 - cells, 

direct comparison of the full LNP -mIFNα2 sample against LNP samples would be confounded 

by immune cell dilution effects. All CD45 + immune contamination is therefore removed via 

CD45 thresholding before any focused comparison is made. Only after this step are the two 

samples comparably enriched for CD45 - tumor/stromal cells. Supervised clustering resolved 

seven transcriptionally distinct populations, which were annotated based on canonical mouse 

colon cancer marker gene expression 59 . Treatment -driven changes in cell population 

composition were quantified as proportional bar charts and absolute cell counts. DEG analysis 

between treatment groups within each population was performed as described for the CD45 +

compartment. 

Cross -species human immunotherapy response analysis . To assess the transcriptomic 

correspondence between LNP -mIFNα2 -induced mouse TME reprogramming and human 

immunotherapy response signatures, we analyzed a publicly available scRNA -seq dataset from 

human breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant pembroliz umab (GSE160246 )66 . In this 

dataset, patients were classified as T cell clonotype Expanders (E) or Non -Expanders (NE) based 

on T cell receptor clonotype expansion upon pembrolizumab treatment, serving as a surrogate for 

immunotherapy responsiveness. The human dataset was processed using Seurat with human 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

genome reference GRCh38. Cell type annotation was performed using human -specific canonical 

markers for T cell subsets (CD8A, CD4, FOXP3, TCF7, HAVCR2, PRF1, GZMB, NKG7, 

IFNG, CXCL13) and myeloid subsets (CD68, MRC1, C1QA, ISG15, IFITM3, FCN1, CD14). 

Cell p opulations were resolved into ten T/NK cell phenotypes and seven myeloid/macrophage 

phenotypes by UMAP clustering. Proportional composition of each cell population in E versus 

NE patients was compared using boxplot visualization and Mann -Whitney U test. Di fferential 

gene expression in the Tpex/Follicular T cell population between E and NE patients was 

visualized by volcano plot (log2 fold -change on x -axis, -log10 adjusted p-value on y -axis). Gene 

programs enriched in E patients were compared to gene programs upregulated in LNP -mIFNα2 -

treated mouse T cell and myeloid populations to identify cross -species transcriptomic 

concordance. 

Statistical Analysis . All statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 10. Oridinary 

One Way ANOVAs followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons and paired Student’s t -test were 

used to determine statistical significance. A p<0.05 is considered as significant. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Ms. Jennifer Parks at Augusta Shepeard Community Blood Center for providing 

blood specimens from healthy donors. We acknowledge the support and contribution of the 

Integrated Genomics Core Shared Resources at the Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta University 

(RRID: SCR_026483). We acknowledge the support and contribution of the Immune Monitoring 

Shared Resource at the Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta University (RRID: SCR_026590), 

including Rafal Pacholczyk , Valentyna Fesenkova, and Atsuko Matsunag a. We thank Donna 

Kumiski in the Electron Microscopy & Histology Core Facility at Medical College of Georgia 

for assistance in cytokine analysis and histology .

Funding . Grant support from the US Department of Veterans Affairs I01CX001364 (to K.L). 

National Cancer Institute R01CA278852 (to K.L.), and R43CA287611 (to P. S. R.) .

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Author Contributions : Conceptualization ( ZT , PC, PSR , KL), Methodology: ( ZT , PC, DBP, 

HRM, KF, DY ), Funding acquisition: ( PSR, KL), Project administration ( PSR, KL), 

Bioinformatics ( PC, RR, SB), Pathological analysis (JW, LVZ, MZ), Writing : original draft ( ZT ,

PC, PSR , KL), Writing : review & editing: ( PC, ZT, JW, LVZ, MZ, PSR, KL )

Conflict of interest : None. 

Data availability : The scRNA -Seq transcriptomics datasets are deposited in GEO database. 

Accession #GS E335642 .

REFERENCES 

1. Andre, T., Shiu, K.K., Kim, T.W., Jensen, B.V., Jensen, L.H., Punt, C., Smith, D., Garcia -

Carbonero, R., Benavides, M., Gibbs, P., et al. (2020). Pembrolizumab in Microsatellite -

Instability -High Advanced Colorectal Cancer. N Engl J Med 383 , 2207 -2218. 

10.1056/NEJMoa2017699. 

2. Cercek, A., Lumish, M., Sinopoli, J., Weiss, J., Shia, J., Lamendola -Essel, M., El Dika, I.H., 

Segal, N., Shcherba, M., Sugarman, R., et al. (2022). PD -1 Blockade in Mismatch Repair -

Deficient, Locally Advanced Rectal Cancer. N Engl J Med 386 , 2363 -2376. 

10.1056/NEJMoa2201445. 

3. Diaz, L.A., Jr., Shiu, K.K., Kim, T.W., Jensen, B.V., Jensen, L.H., Punt, C., Smith, D., 

Garcia -Carbonero, R., Benavides, M., Gibbs, P., et al. (2022). Pembrolizumab versus 

chemotherapy for microsatellite instability -high or mismatch repair -deficient meta static 

colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE -177): final analysis of a randomised, open -label, phase 3 

study. Lancet Oncol 23 , 659 -670. 10.1016/S1470 -2045(22)00197 -8. 

4. Brahmer, J.R., Tykodi, S.S., Chow, L.Q., Hwu, W.J., Topalian, S.L., Hwu, P., Drake, C.G., 

Camacho, L.H., Kauh, J., Odunsi, K., et al. (2012). Safety and activity of anti -PD -L1 

antibody in patients with advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 366 , 2455 -2465. 

10.1056/NEJMoa1200694. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

5. Le, D.T., Kim, T.W., Van Cutsem, E., Geva, R., Jager, D., Hara, H., Burge, M., O'Neil, B., 

Kavan, P., Yoshino, T., et al. (2020). Phase II Open -Label Study of Pembrolizumab in 

Treatment -Refractory, Microsatellite Instability -High/Mismatch Repair -Deficient Metastatic 

Colorectal Cancer: KEYNOTE -164. J Clin Oncol 38 , 11 -19. 10.1200/JCO.19.02107. 

6. Acha -Sagredo, A., Andrei, P., Clayton, K., Taggart, E., Antoniotti, C., Woodman, C.A., 

Afrache, H., Fourny, C., Armero, M., Moinudeen, H.K., et al. (2025). A constitutive 

interferon -high immunophenotype defines response to immunotherapy in colorectal canc er. 

Cancer Cell 43 , 292 -307 e297. 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.12.008. 

7. Diamond, M.S., Kinder, M., Matsushita, H., Mashayekhi, M., Dunn, G.P., Archambault, 

J.M., Lee, H., Arthur, C.D., White, J.M., Kalinke, U., et al. (2011). Type I interferon is 

selectively required by dendritic cells for immune rejection of tumors. J Exp Me d 208 , 1989 -

2003. 10.1084/jem.20101158. 

8. Dunn, G.P., Bruce, A.T., Sheehan, K.C., Shankaran, V., Uppaluri, R., Bui, J.D., Diamond, 

M.S., Koebel, C.M., Arthur, C., White, J.M., and Schreiber, R.D. (2005). A critical function 

for type I interferons in cancer immunoediting. Nat Immunol 6, 722 -729. 

9. Shankaran, V., Ikeda, H., Bruce, A.T., White, J.M., Swanson, P.E., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, 

R.D. (2001). IFNgamma and lymphocytes prevent primary tumour development and shape 

tumour immunogenicity. Nature 410 , 1107 -1111. 10.1038/35074122. 

10. Zitvogel, L., Galluzzi, L., Kepp, O., Smyth, M.J., and Kroemer, G. (2015). Type I interferons 

in anticancer immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 15 , 405 -414. 10.1038/nri3845. 

11. Sistigu, A., Yamazaki, T., Vacchelli, E., Chaba, K., Enot, D.P., Adam, J., Vitale, I., Goubar, 

A., Baracco, E.E., Remedios, C., et al. (2014). Cancer cell -autonomous contribution of type I 

interferon signaling to the efficacy of chemotherapy. Nat Med 20 , 1301 -1309. 

10.1038/nm.3708nm.3708 [pii]. 

12. Stone, M.L., Chiappinelli, K.B., Li, H., Murphy, L.M., Travers, M.E., Topper, M.J., Mathios, 

D., Lim, M., Shih, I.M., Wang, T.L., et al. (2017). Epigenetic therapy activates type I 

interferon signaling in murine ovarian cancer to reduce immunosuppression and tumor 

burden. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 , E10981 -E10990. 

10.1073/pnas.17125141141712514114 [pii]. 

13. Cauwels, A., Van Lint, S., Garcin, G., Bultinck, J., Paul, F., Gerlo, S., Van der Heyden, J., 

Bordat, Y., Catteeuw, D., De Cauwer, L., et al. (2018). A safe and highly efficient tumor -

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

targeted type I interferon immunotherapy depends on the tumor microenvironment. 

Oncoimmunology 7, e1398876. 10.1080/2162402X.2017.13988761398876 [pii]. 

14. Cauwels, A., Van Lint, S., Paul, F., Garcin, G., De Koker, S., Van Parys, A., Wueest, T., 

Gerlo, S., Van der Heyden, J., Bordat, Y., et al. (2018). Delivering Type I Interferon to 

Dendritic Cells Empowers Tumor Eradication and Immune Combination Treatment s. Cancer 

Res 78 , 463 -474. 10.1158/0008 -5472.CAN -17 -19800008 -5472.CAN -17 -1980 [pii]. 

15. Brown, M.C., Holl, E.K., Boczkowski, D., Dobrikova, E., Mosaheb, M., Chandramohan, V., 

Bigner, D.D., Gromeier, M., and Nair, S.K. (2017). Cancer immunotherapy with recombinant 

poliovirus induces IFN -dominant activation of dendritic cells and tumor antigen -specific 

CTLs. Sci Transl Med 9. eaan4220 [pii]10.1126/scitranslmed.aan42209/408/eaan4220 [pii]. 

16. Gozgit, J.M., Vasbinder, M.M., Abo, R.P., Kunii, K., Kuplast -Barr, K.G., Gui, B., Lu, A.Z., 

Molina, J.R., Minissale, E., Swinger, K.K., et al. (2021). PARP7 negatively regulates the 

type I interferon response in cancer cells and its inhibition triggers an titumor immunity. 

Cancer Cell 39 , 1214 -1226 e1210. 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.06.018. 

17. Duong, E., Fessenden, T.B., Lutz, E., Dinter, T., Yim, L., Blatt, S., Bhutkar, A., Wittrup, 

K.D., and Spranger, S. (2021). Type I interferon activates MHC class I -dressed CD11b(+) 

conventional dendritic cells to promote protective anti -tumor CD8(+) T cell immunity. 

Immunity. 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.10.020. 

18. Propper, D.J., and Balkwill, F.R. (2022). Harnessing cytokines and chemokines for cancer 

therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 10.1038/s41571 -021 -00588 -9. 

19. Grippin, A.J., Marconi, C., Copling, S., Li, N., Braun, C., Woody, C., Young, E., Gupta, P., 

Wang, M., Wu, A., et al. (2025). SARS -CoV -2 mRNA vaccines sensitize tumours to immune 

checkpoint blockade. Nature 647 , 488 -497. 10.1038/s41586 -025 -09655 -y. 

20. Shin, D.S., Zaretsky, J.M., Escuin -Ordinas, H., Garcia -Diaz, A., Hu -Lieskovan, S., Kalbasi, 

A., Grasso, C.S., Hugo, W., Sandoval, S., Torrejon, D.Y., et al. (2017). Primary Resistance to 

PD -1 Blockade Mediated by JAK1/2 Mutations. Cancer Discov 7, 188 -201. 10.1158/2159 -

8290.CD -16 -1223. 

21. Zaretsky, J.M., Garcia -Diaz, A., Shin, D.S., Escuin -Ordinas, H., Hugo, W., Hu -Lieskovan, 

S., Torrejon, D.Y., Abril -Rodriguez, G., Sandoval, S., Barthly, L., et al. (2016). Mutations 

Associated with Acquired Resistance to PD -1 Blockade in Melanoma. N Engl J Med 375 ,

819 -829. 10.1056/NEJMoa1604958. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

22. Kalbasi, A., Tariveranmoshabad, M., Hakimi, K., Kremer, S., Campbell, K.M., Funes, J.M., 

Vega -Crespo, A., Parisi, G., Champekar, A., Nguyen, C., et al. (2020). Uncoupling interferon 

signaling and antigen presentation to overcome immunotherapy resistance d ue to JAK1 loss 

in melanoma. Sci Transl Med 12 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.abb0152. 

23. Torrejon, D.Y., Abril -Rodriguez, G., Champhekar, A.S., Tsoi, J., Campbell, K.M., Kalbasi, 

A., Parisi, G., Zaretsky, J.M., Garcia -Diaz, A., Puig -Saus, C., et al. (2020). Overcoming 

Genetically Based Resistance Mechanisms to PD -1 Blockade. Cancer Discov 10 , 1140 -1157. 

10.1158/2159 -8290.CD -19 -1409. 

24. Gao, J., Shi, L.Z., Zhao, H., Chen, J., Xiong, L., He, Q., Chen, T., Roszik, J., Bernatchez, C., 

Woodman, S.E., et al. (2016). Loss of IFN -gamma Pathway Genes in Tumor Cells as a 

Mechanism of Resistance to Anti -CTLA -4 Therapy. Cell 167 , 397 -404 e399. S0092 -

8674(16)31167 -9 [pii]10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.069. 

25. Mowat, C., Mosley, S.R., Namdar, A., Schiller, D., and Baker, K. (2021). Anti -tumor 

immunity in mismatch repair -deficient colorectal cancers requires type I IFN -driven CCL5 

and CXCL10. J Exp Med 218 . 10.1084/jem.20210108. 

26. Huang, K.C., Chiang, S.F., Chang, H.Y., Hong, W.Z., Chen, J.Y., Lee, P.C., Liang, J.A., Ke, 

T.W., Peng, S.L., Shiau, A.C., et al. (2024). Colorectal cancer -specific IFNbeta delivery 

overcomes dysfunctional dsRNA -mediated type I interferon signaling to inc rease the 

abscopal effect of radiotherapy. J Immunother Cancer 12 . 10.1136/jitc -2023 -008515. 

27. Krieg, A.M. (2025). New insights into the role of IFN -alpha/beta and TLR7/8/9 in cancer 

immunotherapy and systemic autoimmunity. J Immunother Cancer 13 . 10.1136/jitc -2025 -

012165. 

28. Klement, J.D., Redd, P.S., Lu, C., Merting, A.D., Poschel, D.B., Yang, D., Savage, N.M., 

Zhou, G., Munn, D.H., Fallon, P.G., and Liu, K. (2023). Tumor PD -L1 engages myeloid PD -

1 to suppress type I interferon to impair cytotoxic T lymphocyte recruitment. C ancer Cell 41 ,

620 -636 e629. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.02.005. 

29. Kirkwood, J. (2002). Cancer immunotherapy: the interferon -alpha experience. Semin Oncol 

29 , 18 -26. S0093 -7754(02)50195 -0 [pii]. 

30. Garbe, C., and Eigentler, T.K. (2007). Diagnosis and treatment of cutaneous melanoma: state 

of the art 2006. Melanoma Res 17 , 117 -127. 10.1097/CMR.0b013e328042bb3600008390 -

200704000 -00007 [pii]. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

31. Hervas -Stubbs, S., Perez -Gracia, J.L., Rouzaut, A., Sanmamed, M.F., Le Bon, A., and 

Melero, I. (2011). Direct effects of type I interferons on cells of the immune system. Clin 

Cancer Res 17 , 2619 -2627. 10.1158/1078 -0432.CCR -10 -11141078 -0432.CCR -10 -1114 [pii]. 

32. Trinchieri, G. (2010). Type I interferon: friend or foe? J Exp Med 207 , 2053 -2063. 

10.1084/jem.20101664. 

33. Hauschild, A., Dummer, R., Ugurel, S., Kaehler, K.C., Egberts, F., Fink, W., Both -Skalsky, 

J., Laetsch, B., and Schadendorf, D. (2008). Combined treatment with pegylated interferon -

alpha -2a and dacarbazine in patients with advanced metastatic melanoma: a phase 2 study. 

Cancer 113 , 1404 -1411. 10.1002/cncr.23722. 

34. Eliason, J.F. (2001). Pegylated cytokines: potential application in immunotherapy of cancer. 

BioDrugs 15 , 705 -711. 10.2165/00063030 -200115110 -00001. 

35. Lee, S., and Margolin, K. (2011). Cytokines in cancer immunotherapy. Cancers (Basel) 3,

3856 -3893. 10.3390/cancers3043856. 

36. Dummer, R., and Mangana, J. (2009). Long -term pegylated interferon -alpha and its potential 

in the treatment of melanoma. Biologics 3, 169 -182. 10.2147/btt.2009.3051. 

37. Cao, X., Liang, Y., Hu, Z., Li, H., Yang, J., Hsu, E.J., Zhu, J., Zhou, J., and Fu, Y.X. (2021). 

Next generation of tumor -activating type I IFN enhances anti -tumor immune responses to 

overcome therapy resistance. Nat Commun 12 , 5866. 10.1038/s41467 -021 -26112 -2. 

38. Yang, X., Zhang, X., Fu, M.L., Weichselbaum, R.R., Gajewski, T.F., Guo, Y., and Fu, Y.X. 

(2014). Targeting the tumor microenvironment with interferon -beta bridges innate and 

adaptive immune responses. Cancer Cell 25 , 37 -48. 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.12.004. 

39. Dolgin, E. (2021). The tangled history of mRNA vaccines. Nature 597 , 318 -324. 

10.1038/d41586 -021 -02483 -w. 

40. Lu, C., Stewart, D.J., Lee, J.J., Ji, L., Ramesh, R., Jayachandran, G., Nunez, M.I., Wistuba, 

II, Erasmus, J.J., Hicks, M.E., et al. (2012). Phase I clinical trial of systemically administered 

TUSC2(FUS1) -nanoparticles mediating functional gene transfer i n humans. PLoS One 7,

e34833. 10.1371/journal.pone.0034833. 

41. Meraz, I.M., Majidi, M., Cao, X., Lin, H., Li, L., Wang, J., Baladandayuthapani, V., Rice, D., 

Sepesi, B., Ji, L., and Roth, J.A. (2018). TUSC2 Immunogene Therapy Synergizes with Anti -

PD -1 through Enhanced Proliferation and Infiltration of Natural Killer Cells in Syngeneic 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

Kras -Mutant Mouse Lung Cancer Models. Cancer Immunol Res 6, 163 -177. 10.1158/2326 -

6066.CIR -17 -0273. 

42. Al Subeh, Z.Y., Poschel, D.B., Redd, P.S., Klement, J.D., Merting, A.D., Yang, D., Mehta, 

M., Shi, H., Colson, Y.L., Oberlies, N.H., et al. (2022). Lipid Nanoparticle Delivery of Fas 

Plasmid Restores Fas Expression to Suppress Melanoma Growth In Vivo. ACS Nano 16 ,

12695 -12710. 10.1021/acsnano.2c04420. 

43. Merting, A.D., Poschel, D.B., Lu, C., Klement, J.D., Yang, D., Li, H., Shi, H., Chapdelaine, 

E., Montgomery, M., Redman, M.T., et al. (2022). Restoring FAS Expression via Lipid -

Encapsulated FAS DNA Nanoparticle Delivery Is Sufficient to Suppress Colon Tum or 

Growth In Vivo. Cancers (Basel) 14 . 10.3390/cancers14020361. 

44. Patel, M.N., Tiwari, S., Wang, Y., O'Neill, S., Wu, J., Omo -Lamai, S., Espy, C., Chase, L.S., 

Majumder, A., Hoffman, E., et al. (2026). Safer non -viral DNA delivery using lipid 

nanoparticles loaded with endogenous anti -inflammatory lipids. Nat Biotechnol 44 , 79 -89. 

10.1038/s41587 -025 -02556 -5. 

45. Gentner, B., Eoli, M., Farina, F., Barcella, M., Capotondo, A., Mazzoleni, S., Brambilla, V., 

Francavilla, A., Garramone, M., Carrabba, M.G., et al. (2026). Tumor -targeted interferon -

alpha gene therapy for glioblastoma: a phase 1 trial. Nat Med 32 , 2216 -2226. 

10.1038/s41591 -026 -04419 -1. 

46. Seyed, N., Zahedifard, F., Habibzadeh, S., Yousefi, R., Lajevardi, M.S., Gholami, E., and 

Rafati, S. (2022). Antibiotic -Free Nanoplasmids as Promising Alternatives for Conventional 

DNA Vectors. Vaccines (Basel) 10 . 10.3390/vaccines10101710. 

47. Fick, K., Kerns, N., Zhao, Y., Tiamiyu, Z., Poschel, D., Czabala, P., Yang, D., Tang, Y., Xie, 

J., Fesenkova, V., et al. (2025). Lipid nanoparticle -delivered IFNalpha2 activates Cxcl9 to 

increase T cell tumor recruitment to suppress lung metastasis. J Imm unother Cancer 13 .

10.1136/jitc -2024 -011415. 

48. Liu, S.Y., Huang, W.C., Yeh, H.I., Ko, C.C., Shieh, H.R., Hung, C.L., Chen, T.Y., and Chen, 

Y.J. (2019). Sequential Blockade of PD -1 and PD -L1 Causes Fulminant Cardiotoxicity -From 

Case Report to Mouse Model Validation. Cancers (Basel) 11 . 10.3390/cancers11040580. 

49. Song, W., Shen, L., Wang, Y., Liu, Q., Goodwin, T.J., Li, J., Dorosheva, O., Liu, T., Liu, R., 

and Huang, L. (2018). Synergistic and low adverse effect cancer immunotherapy by 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

immunogenic chemotherapy and locally expressed PD -L1 trap. Nat Commun 9, 2237. 

10.1038/s41467 -018 -04605 -x. 

50. Makuch, E., Jasyk, I., Kula, A., Lipinski, T., and Siednienko, J. (2022). IFNbeta -Induced 

CXCL10 Chemokine Expression Is Regulated by Pellino3 Ligase in Monocytes and 

Macrophages. Int J Mol Sci 23 . 10.3390/ijms232314915. 

51. Negishi, H., Wada, Y., Shirasaki, Y., Hayashi, T., Kubota, Y., Iwasaki, T., Kurosawa, M., 

Ban, T., Muto, D., Suenaga, Y., et al. (2026). cGAS -IFN -I responses by extracting nuclear 

DNA from dying cells via nucleocytosis. Nat Commun 17 , 1658. 10.1038/s41467 -026 -

68839 -w. 

52. Hailemichael, Y., Johnson, D.H., Abdel -Wahab, N., Foo, W.C., Bentebibel, S.E., Daher, M., 

Haymaker, C., Wani, K., Saberian, C., Ogata, D., et al. (2022). Interleukin -6 blockade 

abrogates immunotherapy toxicity and promotes tumor immunity. Cancer Cell 40 , 509 -523 

e506. 10.1016/j.ccell.2022.04.004. 

53. Liu, S., Zhang, Z., Wang, Z., Liu, C., Liang, G., Xu, T., Li, Z., Duan, X., Xu, G., Feng, X., et 

al. (2026). SPP1 Drives Colorectal Cancer Liver Metastasis and Immunotherapy Resistance 

by Stimulating CXCL12 Production in Cancer -Associated Fibroblasts. Can cer Res 86 , 58 -79. 

10.1158/0008 -5472.CAN -24 -4916. 

54. Qi, J., Sun, H., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Xun, Z., Li, Z., Ding, X., Bao, R., Hong, L., Jia, W., et 

al. (2022). Single -cell and spatial analysis reveal interaction of FAP(+) fibroblasts and 

SPP1(+) macrophages in colorectal cancer. Nat Commun 13 , 1742. 10.1038/s41467 -022 -

29366 -6. 

55. Trehan, R., Huang, P., Zhu, X.B., Wang, X., Soliman, M., Strepay, D., Nur, A., Kedei, N., 

Arhin, M., Ghabra, S., et al. (2025). SPP1 + macrophages cause exhaustion of tumor -specific 

T cells in liver metastases. Nat Commun 16 , 4242. 10.1038/s41467 -025 -59529 -0. 

56. Bill, R., Wirapati, P., Messemaker, M., Roh, W., Zitti, B., Duval, F., Kiss, M., Park, J.C., 

Saal, T.M., Hoelzl, J., et al. (2023). CXCL9:SPP1 macrophage polarity identifies a network 

of cellular programs that control human cancers. Science 381 , 515 -524. 

10.1126/science.ade2292. 

57. Kwart, D., He, J., Srivatsan, S., Lett, C., Golubov, J., Oswald, E.M., Poon, P., Ye, X., Waite, 

J., Zaretsky, A.G., et al. (2022). Cancer cell -derived type I interferons instruct tumor 

monocyte polarization. Cell Rep 41 , 111769. 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111769. 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

58. Elewaut, A., Estivill, G., Bayerl, F., Castillon, L., Novatchkova, M., Pottendorfer, E., 

Hoffmann -Haas, L., Schonlein, M., Nguyen, T.V., Lauss, M., et al. (2025). Cancer cells 

impair monocyte -mediated T cell stimulation to evade immunity. Nature 637 , 716 -725. 

10.1038/s41586 -024 -08257 -4. 

59. Gao, J., Wu, Z., Zhao, M., Zhang, R., Li, M., Sun, D., Cheng, H., Qi, X., Shen, Y., Xu, Q., et 

al. (2022). Allosteric inhibition reveals SHP2 -mediated tumor immunosuppression in colon 

cancer by single -cell transcriptomics. Acta Pharm Sin B 12 , 149 -166. 

10.1016/j.apsb.2021.08.006. 

60. Ahmed, M., Sottnik, J.L., Dancik, G.M., Sahu, D., Hansel, D.E., Theodorescu, D., and 

Schwartz, M.A. (2016). An Osteopontin/CD44 Axis in RhoGDI2 -Mediated Metastasis 

Suppression. Cancer Cell 30 , 432 -443. 10.1016/j.ccell.2016.08.002. 

61. Czabala, P., Zhao, Y., Klement, J.D., Redd, P.S., Poschel, D., Carver, K., Fick, K., Tiamiyu, 

Z., Zoccheddu, M., Schoenlein, P., et al. (2026). Distinct and cooperative roles of host and 

tumor Osteopontin in colorectal cancer liver metastasis. bioRxiv, 20 26.2002.2019.706899. 

10.64898/2026.02.19.706899. 

62. Lei, G., Lu, Z., Xu, Z., Braun, C., Huo, D., Gao, J., Tan, L., Hong, T., Wu, S., Sun, M., et al. 

(2026). Cuproptosis -immunity crosstalk informs strategy to overcome immunotherapy 

resistance. Cell. 10.1016/j.cell.2026.05.036. 

63. Lei, G., Sun, M., Cheng, J., Ye, R., Lu, Z., Horbath, A., Huo, D., Wu, S., Alapati, A., 

Aggarwal, S., et al. (2025). Radiotherapy promotes cuproptosis and synergizes with 

cuproptosis inducers to overcome tumor radioresistance. Cancer Cell 43 , 1076 -1092 e1075. 

10.1016/j.ccell.2025.03.031. 

64. Yang, Z., Su, W., Wei, X., Pan, Y., Xing, M., Niu, L., Feng, B., Kong, W., Ren, X., Huang, 

F., et al. (2025). Hypoxia inducible factor -1alpha drives cancer resistance to cuproptosis. 

Cancer Cell 43 , 937 -954 e939. 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.02.015. 

65. Dang, D., Deogharkar, A., McKolay, J., Smith, K.S., Panwalkar, P., Hoffman, S., Tian, W., 

Ji, S., Azambuja, A.P., Natarajan, S.K., et al. (2025). Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 primes 

group -3 medulloblastomas for cuproptosis. Cancer Cell 43 , 1159 -1174 e1158. 

10.1016/j.ccell.2025.04.013. 

66. Bassez, A., Vos, H., Van Dyck, L., Floris, G., Arijs, I., Desmedt, C., Boeckx, B., Vanden 

Bempt, M., Nevelsteen, I., Lambein, K., et al. (2021). A single -cell map of intratumoral 

> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.734809 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

changes during anti -PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer. Nat Med 27 , 820 -832. 

10.1038/s41591 -021 -01323 -8. 

67. Wei, J., Marisetty, A., Schrand, B., Gabrusiewicz, K., Hashimoto, Y., Ott, M., Grami, Z., 

Kong, L.Y., Ling, X., Caruso, H., et al. (2019). Osteopontin mediates glioblastoma -

associated macrophage infiltration and is a potential therapeutic target. J Clin I nvest 129 ,

137 -149. 10.1172/JCI121266. 

68. Nose, Y., Yasumizu, Y., Saito, T., Nakamura, Y., Jinushi, K., Fujikawa, K., Momose, K., 

Yamashita, K., Tanaka, K., Yamamoto, K., et al. (2026). PD -1 antibody -bound progenitor -

exhausted CD8(+) T cells in lymph nodes boost PD -1-blockade anti -tumor immunity in 

gastrointestinal cancer. Nat Commun 17 . 10.1038/s41467 -026 -70751 -2. 

69. Chakravarti, M., Dhar, S., Bera, S., Sinha, A., Roy, K., Sarkar, A., Dasgupta, S., Bhuniya, 

A., Saha, A., Das, J., et al. (2023). Terminally Exhausted CD8+ T Cells Resistant to PD -1

Blockade Promote Generation and Maintenance of Aggressive Cancer Stem Cel ls. Cancer 

Res 83 , 1815 -1833. 10.1158/0008 -5472.CAN -22 -3864. 

70. Watson, M.J., Vignali, P.D.A., Mullett, S.J., Overacre -Delgoffe, A.E., Peralta, R.M., 

Grebinoski, S., Menk, A.V., Rittenhouse, N.L., DePeaux, K., Whetstone, R.D., et al. (2021). 

Metabolic support of tumour -infiltrating regulatory T cells by lactic acid. N ature 591 , 645 -

651. 10.1038/s41586 -020 -03045 -2. 

71. Souto, E.B., Blanco -Llamero, C., Krambeck, K., Kiran, N.S., Yashaswini, C., Postwala, H., 

Severino, P., Priefer, R., Prajapati, B.G., and Maheshwari, R. (2024). Regulatory insights 

into nanomedicine and gene vaccine innovation: Safety assessment, challeng es, and 

regulatory perspectives. Acta Biomater 180 , 1 -17. 10.1016/j.actbio.2024.04.010. 

72. Williams, J.A. (2013). Vector Design for Improved DNA Vaccine Efficacy, Safety and 

Production. Vaccines (Basel) 1, 225 -249. 10.3390/vaccines1030225. 

73. Paschall, A.V., and Liu, K. (2016). An Orthotopic Mouse Model of Spontaneous Breast 

Cancer Metastasis. J Vis Exp. 10.3791/54040. 

74. Sanz, H., Aponte, J.J., Harezlak, J., Dong, Y., Ayestaran, A., Nhabomba, A., Mpina, M., 

Maurin, O.R., Diez -Padrisa, N., Aguilar, R., et al. (2017). drLumi: An open -source package 

to manage data, calibrate, and conduct quality control of multiplex bead -bas ed 

immunoassays data analysis. PLoS One 12 , e0187901. 10.1371/journal.pone.0187901.