Title: Stromal cell subsets modulate T-cell infiltration in early breast cancer

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
> 1
> Stromal cell subsets modulate T-cell infiltration in early breast cancer
> Julia Chen 1-3* , Hanyun Zhang 1,2* , Travis Ruan 1,2 , Sunny Z Wu 4, Iveta Slapetova 5, Ewan Millar 2,6 , Peter H Graham 2,3 , Jodi Lynch 3, Lois H Browne 2,3 , Elgene Lim 1,2,7 , Alexander Swarbrick 1,2
> 1.  Cancer Ecosystems Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia 2.  School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia 3.  St George Cancer Care Centre, St George Hospital, Sydney, Australia 4.  Immunology Discovery & Oncology Bioinformatics, Genentech, CA USA 5.  Katharina Gaus Light Microscopy Facility, University of New South Wales, Australia 6.  Department of Anatomical Pathology, NSW Health Pathology, St George Hospital, Sydney, Australia 7.  The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, St Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia * Co-first authors Running title: Stromal-immune Interactions in Breast Cancer Corresponding author: Alexander Swarbrick 384 Victoria St, Darlinghurst NSW, Australia, 2010 a.swarbrick@garvan.org.au
> Conflict of interest:
> AS is a paid consultant for Phenomic AI and Create Therapeutics, and receives research support from 10X Genomic and Nanostring Technologies. No disclosures were reported by the other authors.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2
> Abstract
> Recent studies of the tumour microenvironment have elucidated the heterogeneity of stromal cells, with increasing evidence suggesting that stromal subsets play an important role in regulating anti-tumour immunity in breast cancer. However, the functional diversity of these cells within the tumour immune microenvironment and how they interact with immune cells in a spatial and clinical context remain poorly understood. We performed multiplex immunofluorescence on tumour microarrays from two cohorts consisting of 591 breast cancer patients to assess the abundance and spatial co-localisation of stromal and immune subsets and their correlation with clinicopathological features and patient outcomes. We found that stromal cells were spatially distinct. A perivascular-like subset that was disseminated throughout the stroma rather than restricted to vessel-adjacent regions was enriched in an immune cold environment and associated with T-cell exclusion. An inflammatory-like cancer-associated fibroblast subset was associated with segregation of T cells from cancer cells. Our findings highlight the differential impact of stromal subsets on immune infiltration and activation within the breast cancer tumour microenvironment with potential implications for patient outcomes.
> Significance
> This study characterised spatially-defined interactions between stromal and immune subsets in large clinical cohorts of early breast cancer. Findings from this study will contribute to gaps in current knowledge in how diverse stromal cell subsets, particularly novel subsets, interact with immune cells in a clinically-relevant context.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3
> Introduction
> Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women and despite advancements in treatment over the last few decades, it remains the leading cause of cancer-related death among females worldwide (1). Recent studies into the tumour microenvironment (TME) have revealed complex functional roles of stromal cells in tumorigenesis, progression and suppression (2). Although there is increasing evidence that stromal cells affect tumour immunity, the diversity of stromal cell subsets and their interactions with immune cells in a clinically relevant context remain poorly understood. Recent advances in technologies such as single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) have allowed the characterisation of tumours in tremendous resolution and results highlight the heterogeneity of stromal and immune cells within the TME. Different cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) subpopulations or states with discrete phenotypic, transcriptional and functional properties have been described in various cancer types (3-7). In breast cancer, our previous scRNA-seq study has revealed four distinct populations of stromal cells: myofibroblast-like CAF (myCAF), inflammatory-like CAF (iCAF) and two perivascular-like cells (PVLs) in differentiated and immature states (8, 9). Each of these subpopulations displayed distinct morphologies, spatial relationships and functional properties. Similarly, scRNA-seq of immune cells showed that a significant heterogeneity exists in the infiltrating T cell population (10). The effectiveness of CD8 + T cells is regulated by immune checkpoint molecules including PD-1 and its ligand PD-L1 and these are the targets of most currently available immunotherapies. One of the major limitations of single-cell technologies is the lack of information on the structural organisation of cells within a tumour, which has increasingly been recognised as a factor that contributes to the heterogeneity, variable tumour behaviours and differential response to treatments observed in most cancers (11). Spatial profiling has hence been explored to provide a more comprehensive view of the intricate cellular makeup of solid tumours, enabling examination of different cell types, their locations and interactions within different layers of spatial organisation. Integration of this with clinical data from large cohorts enables the exploration of spatially defined TME components as predictors of treatment response and patient outcomes, with the potential to
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4
> discover novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets, thereby improving the precision of cancer diagnosis and management (12). Here we performed multiplex immunofluorescence (mIF) on tumour microarrays (TMAs) from two independent primary breast cancer cohorts using a panel of stromal and immune markers defined using our scRNA-seq results. The abundance and spatial co-localisation of annotated stromal and immune subsets were linked with clinicopathological data to assess their clinical significance.
> MATERIALS AND METHODS
> Clinical cohorts
> This study consists of TMA cores from 591 breast cancer patients with luminal and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtypes. All tumours were sampled pre-treatment. Luminal patients (n=369) were recruited as part of the Breast Boost trial where patients received wide local excision with whole breast irradiation with randomisation to cavity boost or no boost (13). The TNBC cases (n=222) were identified by a review of the Oncology database at St George Hospital between 2004 and 2019 (14). Tumours were classified into molecular subtypes according to the following definitions: luminal A: ER + ≥1%, PR +>20%, HER2 -, Ki67 < 14%; luminal B: ER +, PR +≤ 20% and/or HER2 +
> and/or Ki67 ≥14%; TNBC: ER/PR - (<1%), HER2 -.TMA slides were constructed with 3x1mm cores sampled from the periphery of tumour blocks marked by a breast pathologist on a H&E slide. Paraffin sections were cut at 4μm onto Superfrost glass slides (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and stained using H&E using a Leica Bond Rx automated immunostainer machine (Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany).
> Multiplexed immunofluorescence
> Opal 9 TM  was used for mIF imaging (Akoya Biosicences, Marlborough, MA, USA), with primary antibody conditions optimised for DAB (3,3’-diaminobenzidine) staining applied to both monoplex and multiplex optimisations. Each biomarker antibody was paired with a specific Opal fluorophore based on the co-expression patterns of biomarkers in the tissue and their anticipated protein expression levels ( Supplementary table 1 ).
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5
> Image analysis
> Slides were scanned using the Vectra Polaris 3.0 (Akoya Biosciences) using 40 × magnification. Cell type identification and classification were performed in accordance with the method described by Wang et al (14). Briefly, TMA images were analysed using QuPath v0.2.3 (RRID:SCR_018257, https://qupath.github.io). All TMA files and their corresponding TMA maps were imported using the TMA module. Tissue core identification numbers generated by the TMA de-arrayer were verified before analysis. Tissue regions were segmented into tumour and stromal compartments using a pixel-based machine learning classifier trained using PanCK staining. Cell segmentation was based on DAPI nuclear staining and implemented using the inbuilt cell detection algorithm. Biomarker phenotyping was conducted through object classification using a random forest algorithm applied to mean nuclear intensity measurements to minimise staining leakage from nearby cells. The final combined classifier was applied to all TMA cores. Cell types were defined by expression or co-expression of markers, including epithelial (PanCK +), endothelial (CD31 +), myCAF (CD140b +αSMA +), iCAF (CD140b +aSMA -CD146 -), differentiated-PVLs (dPVLs) (CD146 +THY1 -), immature-PVL (imPVLs) (CD146 +THY1 +), PD1 + CD8 T cells (PD1 +CD8 +), and other CD8 T cells (PD1 -CD8 +) ( Supplementary table 2). TMA core measurements were linked with corresponding clinical data using patient ID. For patients with more than one core, the median values of these cores were used for analysis. The abundance of cell types was measured for each core as the percentage of cells per total number of detections. Cell proportions were computed within the stromal and tumour regions separately. To account for differences in locations, the proportion of immune cells were taken from the entire core whereas for stromal cells, proportions were taken from stromal regions only to reduce the impact of misclassified stromal cells in tumour regions.
> Spatial analysis
> To investigate the spatial proximity between cell types, we measured the proportion of cell type A with nearby cell type B within a radius of 30-100 μm, with an interval of 10 μm. Cell type A with at least one cell type B within 30 μm were determined as B-adjacent cells. Type A cells without type B cells within 100 μm were defined as B-distal cells. We also measured the minimal distance between a pair of cell types using the  calculate_minimum_distances_between_celltypes  function from the
> SPIAT  package (15). The patient-level metrics were summarised as the median across TMA cores.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6
> Immune phenotypes
> To characterise patterns of immune distribution, we classified cores into three categories, immune cold, immune intermixing, and immune segregated. Immune cold was determined by a CD8 + T cell infiltration (sum of PD1 +CD8 + and PD1 -CD8 + proportions) below the median. We then examined the co-localisation of CD8 + T and epithelial cells using the area under curve (AUC) of cross K function (15). A positive AUC score of cross K function indicates co-localisation of these cells while a negative AUC score indicates a separation of CD8 + T from epithelial cells. We classified cores with CD8  + T cell proportion over the median and a negative cross K AUC as immune segregated. These cores displayed immune aggregates forming outside the epithelial nest. An immune intermixing group was defined with CD8 + T proportion over the median and a positive cross K AUC.
> Association of spatial features with clinical variables
> We compared the enrichment of stromal subset-related features in groups of patients stratified by clinical characteristics. Features include fibroblast proportions in the stromal region, minimal distance between pairs of cells, proportion of cell type A with cell type B present within a 30μm neighbourhood, and the normalised mixing score defined by the interactions between cell type A and B divided by the sum of interactions between A-A and B-B (15) ( Supplementary table 3 ). The Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed using the  compare_means  function from ggpubr (0.6.0, RRID:SCR_021139) for each feature to determine its difference between groups classified by clinical characteristics. P-value was corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method.
> Statistical Analysis
> Statistical analysis was completed using R 4.4.2. Univariate and multivariate survival analyses were conducted using COX proportional hazards modelling, with a p-value <0.05 considered significant. Clinical variables with known prognostic values, including age, lymph node metastasis, grade, tumour size, and molecular subtypes (luminal A vs. luminal B) were included in the multivariate survival analyses. Survival predictions were represented using Kaplan-Meier (KM) plots (survival 3.7.0, RRID:SCR_021137). Association between specific stromal and immune phenotypes and clinicopathological features were examined using Krustal-Wallis tests and Pearson correlations (stats 4.4.2, RRID:SCR_025678). Statistical significance for comparing patient groups was determined by a p-value <0.05 using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7
> Xenium data generation
> Formalin-fixed Paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks from three TNBC tumours were sectioned at 5 μm and placed onto Xenium slides following the Xenium  In Situ  FFPE Tissue Preparation Guide (10x Genomics, CG000578). Slides were then deparaffinised and de-crosslinked (10x Genomics, CG000580). A predesigned and add-on gene panel of 5101 genes (100 custom add-on genes additional to the default 10X 5k panel ; Supplementary Table 4 ) was added to the tissue following instructions in Xenium Prime (5K)  In situ  Gene Expression (10x Genomics, CG000760). Cell segmentation reagents were applied to assist segmentation of nuclei and cell body (10x Genomics, CG000760). Xenium slides were processed on the Xenium Analyser (serial number XETG00531, software version 3.4.1.0, software analysis version xenium-3.3.0.1) for imaging and analysis (Decoding and Imaging user guide, 10x Genomics, CG000584).
> Xenium cell type annotation and spatial analysis
> Raw Xenium data were converted into AnnData objects using anndata (v5.2.1) (16). Cells with fewer than 10 detected transcripts or fewer than 1 expressed gene were excluded. Cell annotation was performed based on a combined positivity of genes corresponding to the protein markers in the mIF panel ( Supplementary Table 5 ). To identify epithelial cells,  EPCAM  was used as a surrogate of keratin genes encoding PanCK. Adjacent and disseminated PVLs were identified as PVLs (dPVL or imPVL) localised within 30 μm or beyond 100 μm to the nearest endothelial cell, respectively. Distance from PD1 +CD8 + and PD1 -CD8 + T cells to the nearest adjacent or disseminated PVLs was computed using  var_by_distance  function in Squidpy (RRID:SCR_026157) to assess the spatial proximity of T cells to PVL phenotypes (17).
> Differential gene expression and pathway enrichment
> The differential gene expression (DEG) analysis was performed using DESeq2 (1.46.0, RRID:SCR_000154) (18). To reduce the false discovery of DEGs arising from transcript contamination from nearby cells, we constrained DEGs to genes expressed by at least 5% of PVLs in a breast cancer scRNA-seq dataset (8). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was computed separately for upregulated and downregulated genes comparing between adjacent and disseminated PVLs. Genes were first filtered by significance (absolute log 2 fold change > 0.5 and adjusted P-value < 0.05), then the top 100 genes from each subset (ranked by log 2 fold change) were analysed with clusterProfiler
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 8
> (4.14.6, RRID:SCR_016884) (19). Enrichment was performed for Biological Process terms with BH adjustment.
> Ethics
> The Breast Boost study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of St George Hospital, Sydney, Australia (ref No: 96/84), and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Ethics approval for the TNBC cohort was granted by the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District Human Research Ethics Committee at the Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney (Boost: HREC 96/16 and TNBC: HREC 2018/ETH00138), who granted a waiver of consent to analyse the tissue blocks. The TNBC samples profiled using Xenium Prime in this study were collected following protocols x13-0133, x16-018 and x19-0496. Ethical approval for this study was acquired by the Sydney Local Health Districts Ethics committee (Royal Prince Alfred Hospital zone) and St Vincent’s hospital Ethics Committee. Consent for the use of samples in this study was obtained from all patients prior to collection of tissue, and data were de-identified as per approved protocol. All studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
> Data availability
> Raw mIF images and Xenium Prime data are available at https://doi.org/10.6019/S-BSST3074. Processed data can be obtained from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20199307. Other data generated in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
> Code availability
> Code related to the analyses in this study can be found on GitHub at https://github.com/Swarbricklab-code/Stromal_Tcell_Infiltration_mIF
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9
> RESULTS Patient demographics
> A total of 1,356 TMA cores were processed, with a median of 3 cores per patient (range 1-6). 868 TMA cores were from luminal tumours and 488 cores from TNBC tumours ( Figure 1A ). In the luminal cohort, the majority of tumours were luminal A (n=275, 75%) and invasive ductal carcinoma (n = 317, 85.9%). Other histology subtypes include lobular carcinoma (n=34, 9.2%), micropapillary (n = 7, 1.9%), mucinous (n=10, 2.7%) and tubule-lobular (n = 1, 0.3%). 50% (n=184) of patients in this cohort received adjuvant endocrine therapy, 16% (n=59) received chemotherapy and 10% (n=37) received both. The median length of follow-up for this cohort is 16 years for survival. Analysis of clinicopathological features revealed that age, nodal status and molecular subtypes (luminal A vs. luminal B) were independent predictors of patient survival when adjusted for other clinical factors, consistent with known results from literature ( Supplementary table 6 ). The interventional endpoint of this trial, boost vs no boost had no impact on patient outcome (13). For the TNBC cohort, the majority of patients had ductal histology (n=204, 91.9%) and node-negative disease (n=139, 62.6%). 70.3% of patients received adjuvant chemotherapy, including both anthracycline-based and anthracycline-free regimens. The median length of follow-up was 4.5 years for survival. Older age, node positivity, no chemotherapy and large tumour size were associated with poorer survival whereas a high tumour-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) score was associated with better survival in the univariate analyses. Multivariate analysis showed a significant correlation between age and nodal status and overall survival (OS) after adjusting for other significant clinical characteristics as confounders ( Supplementary table 7 ).
> Distinct stromal and immune landscapes in luminal and triple-negative breast cancer
> mIF data were processed using tissue and cell segmentation to locate individual cells in the tumour or stromal regions. Cells were classified into one of the eight types based on the expression of eight markers, including epithelial (PanCK +), endothelial (CD31 +), myCAF (CD140b +αSMA +), iCAF (CD140b +αSMA -CD146 -), dPVLs (CD146 +THY1 -), imPVLs (CD146 +THY1 +), PD1 + CD8 T cells (PD1 +CD8 +), and other CD8 T cells (PD1 -CD8 +) ( Figure 1B-D ). The marker intensity was consistent with the cell type definitions ( Figure 1E ).
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10
> Cell proportions were quantified as the number of cells normalised by the total number of detected cells within the entire TMA core, as well as within tumour and stromal regions separately. Compositions of classified cells were showed in  Figure 1F . Proportions per patient were summarised as the median across cores. Due to the sparsity of imPVL, we merged dPVL and imPVL into a general PVL group for downstream analyses. TNBC tumours were enriched in endothelial cells compared to luminal tumours, while the proportion of iCAF, myCAF, and PVL were significantly elevated in luminal tumours (p<0.05,  Figure 1G ). Within the stromal compartment, iCAF represented the most predominant cell type in both luminal and TNBC cases (median 20.59% in luminal and 7.89% in TNBC,  Figure 1G ). The least abundant cell type is imPVL, accounting for 0.036% in Luminal and 0.041% in TNBC. PVLs account for 7.66% (SD 6.45%) and 6.28% (SD 8.38%) of total detected cells in luminal and TNBC respectively, with a standard deviation comparable to that of iCAF and myCAF (iCAF, SD 10.75% in luminal, 7.37% in TNBC; myCAF, SD 8.59% in luminal, 7.36% in TNBC,  Figure 1G ). In contrast, endothelial cells showed relatively stable abundance across patients (SD 1.73% in luminal, 3.12% in TNBC), despite their presumed spatial association with PVL cells ( Figure 1G ). In both stromal and tumour regions, TNBC tumours harboured a higher abundance of PD1 +CD8 + Tcells than luminal cases (p<0.05,  Figure 1H ), aligning with the notion that TNBC is a more immune-inflamed subtype and can benefit from immune checkpoint therapy (20, 21). Surprisingly, luminal cases showed a higher level of PD1 -CD8 + T in the tumour region than TNBC (p<0.001,  Figure 1H ). Despite luminal tumours containing a lower proportion of CD8 + T in general than TNBC (1.58% vs. 2.64%), 116 out of 369 (31.4%) luminal tumours showed a CD8 + T cell percentage higher than the median of TNBC tumours ( Figure 1I ), highlighting heterogeneity in immune infiltration within luminal tumours. Additionally, CD8 + T cell percentage in luminal tumours increased with younger age at diagnosis (p=0.025,  Supplementary figure 1A ), no lymph node metastasis (p=0.013,  Supplementary figure 1B ), and low grade compared to median grade (p=0.045,  Supplementary figure 1C ). No significant difference in CD8 + T cell percentage was observed between luminal A and luminal B subtypes ( Supplementary figure 1D ), or between small (<20mm) and large (>=20mm) tumours (Supplementary figure 1E ).
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11
> We calculated the ratio of PD1 +CD8 + to total CD8 + T cells to quantify the prevalence of CD8 + T cells expressing inhibitory receptors. This ratio varied across patients, ranging from 0 to 0.55 in luminal (median = 0.05), and 0 to 1 (median = 0.26) in TNBC. Patients with higher overall CD8 + T cell proportions tend to have a higher PD1 +CD8 + ratio (luminal, Pearson’s R = 0.15, p = 0.005; TNBC, Pearson’s R = 0.22, p = 0.00086), suggesting that tumours more permissive of T cell infiltration also exhibit increased frequency of inhibitory T cell phenotypes.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13 

> Figure 1. Cohort description and cell type annotations. A.  Cohort overview (Created in BioRender. Zhang, H. (2026) https://BioRender.com/y2inm3s, RRID:SCR_018361).  B.  Cell types of interest defined by the expression of markers.  C.  mIF images were processed with tissue segmentation and cell segmentation to map the distribution of individual cells in stromal and tumour regions.  D.  mIF images showing marker staining and cell type annotation.  E.  Heatmap showing z-score-normalised median intensities of markers across cell types. Stars indicate the key markers of cell types used for classification.  F.  Median percentages of cell types within cells with assigned classes across the entire TMA core, stromal and tumour regions.  G.  Proportions of iCAFs, myCAFs, endothelial cells, and PVLs within all detected cells in the stromal region in luminal and TNBC cohorts.  H.  Proportions of PD1 -
> CD8 + T cells and PD1 +CD8 + T cells within all detected cells in the stromal and tumour regions in luminal and TNBC cohorts.  I.  Compositions of classified cell types in the entire TMA cores per patient, with unclassifiable cells excluded. In the luminal cohort, the vertical dotted line separates patients with CD8 T% above and below the median CD8 T% of the TNBC cohort. Colour bars below the bar plot denote the clinical variables per patient.
> Spatially distinct distribution of stromal subsets and correlation with T cell infiltration
> The three stromal subsets exhibited distinct spatial distributions. myCAFs were most closely associated with cancer cells, as indicated by their shortest median distance to tumour cells and their highest representation in cancer-adjacent compartments ( Figure 2A ). In contrast, iCAFs and PVL cells were predominantly located at greater distances from tumour regions. We observed no significant association between overall CAF abundance within the stromal compartment and T-cell infiltration in luminal cases (Pearson’s R = 0.026, p = 0.62) ( Figure 2B ). In TNBC, however, there was a modest negative correlation (Pearson’s R = –0.14, p = 0.039,  Figure 2B
> When stratifying by stromal subset, divergent associations with CD8 + T cell infiltration emerged. Cores enriched in PVL cells exhibited reduced CD8 + T cell infiltration (p=0.002 for luminal; p=0.0026 for TNBC;  Figure 2C ). Conversely, iCAF-enriched cores demonstrated increased CD8 + T cell infiltration (p<0.001 for luminal; p<0.001 for TNBC,  Figure 2C ), indicating a possible role for iCAFs in supporting or permitting T cell entry into the TME.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14
> Figure 2. Spatial distribution of stromal cell types and their correlation with CD8 +
> T cell infiltration.
> A. Median distance from iCAFs, myCAFs, PVLs to their nearest epithelial cells, and the proportion of each stromal cell type with epithelial cells present within a 30 μm radius.  B.  Correlation between the log-transformed proportions of CD8 + T cells and total stromal cells.  C.  PD1 -CD8 + T cell percentages in TMA cores. Cores are stratified into low and high groups based on the median proportions of myCAFs, PVLs, and iCAFs within the total stromal population in the stromal region.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15
> Immune compositions and spatial distribution reveal three immune infiltration phenotypes
> To further characterise immune infiltration patterns in breast cancer, we classified TMA cores into three immune phenotypes based on T cell enrichment and tumour–T cell co-localisation ( Figures 3A, B). The Immune cold phenotype was defined by total CD8 + T cell proportions below the median across all TMA cores (1.44% in luminal and 1.36% in TNBC). Immune segregated cores displayed spatial separation between tumour and T cell aggregates (cross-K AUC < 0, CD8 + T% ≥ 1.44% in luminal, CD8 + T% ≥ 1.36% in TNBC). Immune intermixing cores exhibited co-localisation of tumour cells and CD8 + T cells (cross-K AUC ≥ 0, CD8 + T% ≥ 1.44% in luminal, CD8 + T% ≥ 1.36% in TNBC). The most prevalent phenotype was immune cold in both cohorts, with a slightly higher proportion in TNBC (48.62% in luminal, 50.20% in TNBC). This was followed by immune segregated (32.83% in luminal, 35.04% in TNBC) and immune intermixing (18.55% in luminal, 14.75% in TNBC;  Figure 3C ). The presence of immune cold cores was associated with reduced survival in luminal tumours but not in TNBC (luminal: univariate p=0.0026; multivariate p=0.018,  Fig. 3D, E ). While in TNBC, the presence of intermixing cores showed a trend to be associated with better survival (p=0.097,  Figure 3F ). It is worth noting that an increased CD8 + T cell% was associated with better survival in the luminal cohort (univariate p=0.027), but not significant when accounting for clinical variables (multivariate p=0.211). This suggests that the presence of an immune cold region better predicts the patient outcome than a summarised proportion of PD1 +CD8 + or PD1 -CD8 + T cells. PD1 +CD8 + T cell ratios display a similar level between segregated and intermixing cores in both subtypes, which were higher than that in the immune cold cores ( Fig. 3G ). The composition of CAF subsets varied by immune phenotype. In both cohorts, iCAFs were most abundant in immune segregated and intermixing phenotypes, and least abundant in immune cold cores ( Figure 3H ). In contrast, PVL cells were most abundant in immune cold cores ( Figure 3H ). myCAFs were more uniformly distributed, with slightly higher levels in intermixing phenotypes in luminal cases ( Figure 3H ). These findings suggest that distinct stromal subsets influence T-cell infiltration in different manners. PVLs may play a role in excluding T cells from infiltrating the tumour whereas iCAFs may relate to separation of cancer and T cells.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 17 

> Figure 3. Immune phenotypes defined by T cell proportions and the co-localisation between T cells and epithelial cells. A.  Cell type maps of represented cores from the luminal cohort with immune cold, immune segregated and immune intermixing phenotypes.  B.  mIF images of three immune phenotypes in luminal and TNBC cohorts. Image on the left shows the entire TMA core; image on the right shows a zoom-in region. The white box indicates the location of the zoom-in region in the TMA core.  C.  Percentages of immune phenotypes in luminal and TNBC cohorts.  D.  KM curves for OS stratified by the presence of immune cold cores in the luminal cohort.  E.  Multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression analysis of OS for the presence of immune cold cores in the luminal cohort, considering age, lymph node metastasis, grade, tumour size, and molecular subtypes.  F.  KM curves for OS stratified by the presence of immune intermixing cores in the TNBC cohort.  G.  The ratio of PD1 +CD8 + T cells to all CD8 + T cells within immune cold, segregated, and intermixing cores.  H.
> Percentages of iCAFs, myCAFs, and PVLs in total stromal cells within TMA cores of different immune phenotypes.
> Endothelial-distal PVLs are associated with T-cell exclusion
> PVL is defined as a perivascular-like stromal cell population marked by CD146 positivity, these include pericytes, vascular smooth muscle cells and other mural cells. In previous studies, we observed that a subset of PVLs is spatially dissociated from endothelial cells, suggesting that these cells may have functions distinct from their conventional role in vascular contractility and blood flow regulation (9). In the luminal cases, we found that about 97.12% of PVLs were distant (>30 μm) from endothelial cells. Even at a 100Xμm threshold, a large majority of PVLs remained distant from endothelial cells ( Figure 4A, B ). TNBC exhibited a lower proportion of disseminated PVLs (70.12% at 30 μm, 22.11% at 100 μm,  Supplementary figure 2A ), likely due to the higher endothelial abundance in TNBC compared to luminal subtype ( Figure 1G ). There was no prominent disseminated PVL in normal breast samples, suggesting the dissociation of PVLs from endothelial cells is specific to tumours ( Figure 4B ). To investigate whether disseminated PVLs form at the expense of PVL-bounded vessels, we assessed the correlation between disseminated PVL (PVLs without endothelial cell present within 100 μm) and the proportion of endothelial cells with PVL present within 30 μm. No significant association was observed (luminal, Pearson’s R=-0.037, p=0.51; TNBC, Pearson’s R=0.077, p=0.26 , Supplementary
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18
> figure 2B, C ). This suggests the existence of a spatially distinct PVL population that is not vessel-dependent. We have observed a reduced CD8 + T cell abundance in PVL-enriched tumours ( Fig. 2C ). To explore the relationship between PVL spatial distribution and T cell infiltration, we examined the association between disseminated PVL abundance and CD8 + T cell proportions across cores. In luminal and especially in TNBC cohorts, CD8 + T cell infiltration was reduced in cores with a higher percentage of disseminated PVLs, suggesting that this PVL subpopulation may negatively regulate T cell entry (luminal: p=0.018; TNBC: p<0.001,  Figure 4C ). To better understand this, we compared the cellular neighbourhoods surrounding PVLs distal versus adjacent to endothelial cells. In both luminal and TNBC, disseminated PVLs had lower proportions of PD1 +CD8 + T cells in their vicinity compared to adjacent PVLs (p<0.01,  Figure 4D ). This supports the observation that disseminated PVLs are associated with T cell exclusion. As further evidence, the proportion of disseminated PVLs in the stromal region was highest in immune cold cores across both subtypes ( Figure 4E ). In contrast, adjacent PVLs were more abundant in segregated and intermixing subtypes ( Figure 4F ). Together, these findings suggest that the influence of PVLs on T cell exclusion was primarily associated with vessel independent PVLs. To validate the immune-cold association of disseminated PVLs, we generated an independent spatial transcriptomics dataset for three TNBC tumours using the Xenium Prime platform (5001 plus 100 genes add-on panel,  Supplementary table 4 ). Stromal and immune phenotypes were annotated based on the combined expression of genes corresponding to the markers used in the mIF panel (Supplementary table 5 ). The classified cell types exhibited expression of canonical lineage markers, confirming the fidelity of our cell type annotation ( Figure 4G ) (22). The overlap of  VWF , ENG , and
> CD34  for endothelial cells and imPVL can be attributed to the spill-over of transcripts from endothelial cells. Within this dataset, disseminated PVLs accounted for an average of 15% of the total PVLs (range: 8.1% to 20.4%), comparable to the prevalence observed in the mIF TNBC cohort (Figure 4H ). Spatial analysis revealed that both PD1 -CD8 + and PD1 +CD8 + T cells were distributed further away from disseminated PVLs than from adjacent PVLs ( Figure 4I, J ), consistent with the CD8 + T cell exclusion associated with disseminated PVLs in the mIF TNBC cohort. Differential gene expression analysis revealed upregulation of genes related to extracellular matrix organisation and vascular stability in adjacent PVLs, including  COL15A1 , COL4A1 , POSTN , IGFBP4 , and  PDGFRB  (Figure
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 19
> 4K, L ). In contrast, disseminated PVLs exhibited upregulation of genes related to vascular permeability, hypoxia signalling and apoptosis, such as  NDRG1 , VEGFA , LDHA , MFGE8 , and  YWHAZ
> (Figure 4K, L ) (23-25). These divergent expression profiles suggest that disseminated PVLs transition away from a vessel maintenance role towards a stress-response state, potentially linked to aberrant vasculature and reduced immune cell infiltration.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21 

> Figure 4. PVLs distal from endothelial cells are associated with T cell exclusion.  PVLs were classified as adjacent if an endothelial cell was present within 30Xμm, and as disseminated if no endothelial cell was present within 100Xμm.  A.  Percentage of PVLs with endothelial cells present within a 10– 100 μm radius in the luminal cohort.  B.  mIF images of TMA cores exhibiting disseminated PVLs in luminal and TNBC tumours, and the co-localisation of PVL and blood vessels in a normal breast sample.  C.  Percentages of CD8 + T cells in TMA cores with high and low disseminated PVL% stratified by the median.  D.  Mean percentages of PD1 +CD8 + and PD1 -CD8 + T cells in the neighbourhood of adjacent and disseminated PVLs. Neighbourhood is defined as the 10 nearest cells to each PVL. Error bar indicates the standard error.  E, F.  Percentages of disseminated and adjacent PVLs in the stromal region of cores classified as immune cold, segregated, or intermixing phenotypes.  G.  Gene expression heatmap of canonical marker genes across cell types identified in Xenium data. Cell types were defined using the same combination of markers derived from the mIF panel. Expression values represent mean counts scaled per gene.  H.  Bar plots showing the proportions of adjacent, disseminated, and other PVLs across Xenium sections from three TNBC tumours.  I.  Representative regions from Xenium sections illustrating the spatial distribution of PVLs, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and CD8 + T cells. Both PD1 +CD8 + and PD1 -CD8 + T cells were found near adjacent PVLs, whereas far away from disseminated PVLs.  J.  Density plot of PD1 +CD8 + and PD1 -CD8 + T cells across a distance (0-300μm) to the nearest adjacent or disseminated PVL.  K.  Volcano plot of DEGs between adjacent and disseminated PVLs. DEGs with an absolute log 2 fold change > 0.5 and adjusted P -value < 0.05 were classified as significantly up- or downregulated. The top 10 DEGs by log 2 fold change in each direction were labelled.  L.  Bar plots showing the top 10 enriched GO Biological Process terms for the top 100 genes upregulated in disseminated PVLs (left, blue) and adjacent PVLs (right, yellow). Bar length represents the -log 10  adjusted P-value, with greater values indicating stronger enrichment.
> iCAFs constrain spatial contacts between T cells and cancer cells  in luminal breast cancer
> In luminal tumours, iCAFs were enriched in immune segregated and intermixing cores, indicating that their presence is not directly associated with an immune cold phenotype ( Figure 3H, 5A ). However, we observed that the minimal distance between CD8 + T cells and epithelial cells in luminal cancers was greater in the presence of iCAFs ( Figure 5B ), suggesting that iCAFs may spatially restrict T cells within the stromal compartment.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 22
> Remarkably, CD8 + T cell infiltration was associated with improved patient survival for luminal tumours with low iCAF abundance in both univariate and multivariate analysis ( Figure 5C, D ), but this prognostic value was lost in iCAF-high tumours. This suggests that high iCAF was associated with T cell dysfunction. Similarly, CD8 + T cell infiltration was associated with improved survival in myCAF-low tumours but not in myCAF-high tumours ( Supplementary figure 3A ). However, the significance was lost after accounting for clinical variables, especially age at diagnosis ( Supplementary figure 3B ). One possible explanation is that myCAFs may also be associated with T cell dysfunction, although we were unable to explore this further due to limitations of our dataset.
> Figure 5. iCAF are associated with the segregation of CD8 +
> T cells from tumour in the luminal cohort.  A.  Representative TMA core showing the spatial distribution of CD8⁺ T cells in iCAF-dense
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23
> (blue) and epithelial-dense (red) regions.  B.  Minimal distance from CD8⁺ T cells to the nearest epithelial cell in TMA cores with low vs. high iCAF proportions.  C.  KM curves for OS stratified by the percentage of PD1⁻CD8⁺ T cells in iCAF-high vs. iCAF-low groups.  D.  Multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression analysis of OS for the proportion of CD8⁺ T cells% in iCAF-low group, considering age, lymph node metastasis, tumour grade, tumour size, and molecular subtype.
> Clinical correlation of spatially resolved cell compositions
> To assess the correlation of spatial context of stromal subsets with clinical characteristics, we evaluated the enrichment of six spatial features per stromal subset in patients stratified by prognostic variables from survival analysis: age at diagnosis, nodal metastasis, tumour grade, histological subtypes, molecular subtypes and TILs ( Supplementary table 6, 7 ). The spatial features include the proportion of PVL, myCAF, and iCAF within the stromal compartment, together with their spatial proximity to endothelial, epithelial, and CD8 T cells measured by minimal distance, normalised mixing score, and proportion of adjacent cells ( Methods , Supplementary table 3 ). Strong association with clinical variables were defined by significant elevation of at least two spatial features within the same clinical group. In luminal tumours, increased proximity between PVL and cancer epithelial cells, as reflected by a higher proportion of cancer-adjacent PVLs and shorter PVL-epithelial minimal distance, was linked to lymph node metastasis ( Figure. 6A ). Enhanced iCAF-cancer proximity showed similar associations with lymph node metastasis ( Figure. 6A ), whereas myCAF-cancer adjacency did not show significant relationship with assessed clinical variables ( Supplementary figure 4A ) On the other hand, closer proximity between iCAF and CD8 + T cells was observed for tumours diagnosed at a younger age (Age<55,  Figure 6A ). There was a similar trend for PVL-CD8 T cell proximity but were significant for the minimal distance only. Additionally, increased stromal iCAF proportions distinguished luminal A subtype and low-grade tumours ( Figure 6A ). For all three stromal cell types, their adjacency to endothelial cells increased in high-grade tumours ( Figure 6A, Supplementary figure 3A ). This is due to the enrichment of endothelial cells in high-grade luminal cases ( Supplementary figure 4B ). In TNBC, PVL-endothelial proximity correlated with nodal metastasis ( Figure. 6B ). Across all the three stromal cell types, high proportions in the stroma and increased spatial separation from CD8 + T
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 24
> cells and endothelial cells associated with reduced immune infiltration ( Figure 6B , Supplementary figure 4C ). Additionally, enhanced iCAF and myCAF adjacency to cancer cells corresponded with reduced TILs ( Figure 6B , Supplementary figure 4C ). These findings indicate that in TNBC, CD8 + T cell and endothelial cell enrichment strongly correlate with clinical TIL assessment, whereas stromal cell abundance generally inversely correlates with immune infiltration. In terms of patient outcomes, we stratified cohorts into ‘high’ or ‘low’ groups based on median cell-type proportions across patients. In the luminal cohort, reduced PD1 -CD8 + T cells and iCAFs proportions, and high PVLs and endothelial cell proportions were associated with inferior OS ( Figure 6C ). In multivariate analysis adjusting for age, node metastasis, tumour grade, tumour size and molecular subtype, endothelial cell abundance remained significantly associated with worse survival (Figure 6C ). In TNBC, similar trends were demonstrated for PD1 -CD8 + T cells, PVLs and endothelial cells, but none of the cell types achieved statistical significance in univariate or multivariate analysis (Figure 6D ).
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25
> Figure 6. Association of iCAF- and PVL-related spatial features with clinical variables in the luminal and TNBC cohorts.  Patients were stratified by clinical variables. Dot colours indicate patient groups in which the feature is increased. Dot outlines denote statistical significance of feature enrichment (red: significant; grey: not significant), assessed by the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with p-values corrected using the BH method. NMS, normalised mixing score.  C.  Univariate and multivariate
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26
> analysis of the association between cell type proportions and OS in the luminal cohort.  D. Same as  C
> for the TNBC cohort.
> DISCUSSION
> In this study, we have characterised the spatially distinct features of stromal subsets in relation to immune cells ( Figure 7 ). This was done in two large breast cancer cohorts consisting of over 1,300 TMA cores from 591 patients. Both cohorts have well-annotated clinicopathological data as well as robust long-term outcome data with follow-up of up to 16 years. This gives our study sufficient power to identify clinically meaningful correlations, while addressing limitations of many prior spatial profiling studies that relied on only a small number of samples or patients and were therefore constrained by tissue selection biases and the challenges of both intra-tumoural and inter-tumoural heterogeneity.
> Figure 7. Diagrammatic summary of key findings  (Created in BioRender. Chen, J. (2026) https://BioRender.com/d28tsrm).  A.  Disseminated PVLs are associated with T cell exclusion and are enriched in immune cold phenotype.  B.  myCAFs are located in close proximity to cancer cells, iCAFs
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.683407 doi: bioRxiv preprint 27
> and PVLs are disseminated throughout the stroma.  C.  iCAFs are enriched in immune segregated phenotype where T cells are present but restricted away from cancer cells. We make the novel observation that the large majority of PVLs are located distant from endothelial cells, despite their perivascular lineage ( Figure 7A ). In breast cancers, but not normal breast, the majority of PVLs were disseminated throughout the stroma rather than restricted to vessel-adjacent regions. Morphologically these cells closely resemble CAFs and share expression of canonical CAF markers such as ACTA2 and PDGFRβ and most likely overlap with cells annotated as vascular-CAFs (vCAFs) in prior studies (3, 22). In Bartoschek et al. (3), vCAFs were defined as cells enriched for mural genes such as  NOTCH3, EPAS1, COL18A1 and NR2F2  and perivascular markers such as  RGS5, MCAM, DES, KCNJ8 and HIGD1B . They do not uniformly exhibit classical fibroblast markers such as
> DCN, FAP  and  PDGFR

## α. It was also observed that these cells lay along vessels early and become increasingly detached with tumour progression (3), consistent with perivascular origin and delamination. At the protein level, vCAFs were fined as CD146 high  CD31 neg  with FAP and PDPN used as discriminators for ‘activated CAFs’ and pericytes required extra markers such as RGS5 (22). vCAF and pericytes were hard to distinguish in some datasets in this study, underscoring phenotypic overlap between these two subsets. Our previously published scRNA-seq data demonstrated distinct transcriptional differences between PVLs and CAFs, supporting their unique identity within the stromal compartment. Gene expressions from our Xenium data demonstrated the consistency between the CAF and PVL cell types identified by mIF and their corresponding transcriptomic profiles (Figure 4G ). Together, our studies and the literature support recasting ‘vCAFs’ as perivascular-like stromal cells that frequently lack classical fibroblast-ECM features and may delaminate from vessels into the tumour stroma. In normal breast tissue, this PVL subset resembles vascular smooth muscle cells, transcriptionally and spatially distinct from pericytes (26). Our study is the first to link increased PVL proportion with CD8 + T cell exclusion and a cold immunophenotype ( Figure 7A ), consistent across both luminal and TNBC cohorts. This discovery was uniquely enabled by the application of a marker panel targeting stromal and lymphocyte subsets to large cohorts of disease. In the luminal cohort, higher PVL proportion was prognostic of poorer OS. While this was not statistically significant in the TNBC cohort, potentially limited by its smaller sample size, a similar trend was observed. PVL-associated T cell exclusion was primarily associated with the subpopulation of disseminated PVLs, where increased endothelial-distal PVLs correlated