Title: GenoME: a MoE-based generative model for individualized, multimodal prediction and perturbation of genomic profiles

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482v2.full.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 23:46:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
GenoME: a MoE -based generative model for individualized, 

# multimodal  prediction and perturbation of  genomic profiles 

Jiachen Wei a* , Yue Xue b, Hao Chai b, Yi Qin Gao a,b,c ,d * 

> a

Changping Laboratory, Beijing 102206, China  

> b

Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry  and Molecular Engineering, 

Peking University, Beijing 100871, China  

> c

Biomedical Pioneering Innovation Center (BIOPIC), Peking University,  Beijing, China  

> d

School of Science , Westlake  University,  Hangzhou , China 

* To whom  correspondence sho uld be addressed : weijiachen@cpl.ac.cn ; gaoyq@pku.edu.cn 

The non -coding genome operates through a complex, multiscale regulatory system where  regulated  gene 

expression s are  closely associated with cell -type -specific histone modifications, transcription factor binding  and 

3D conformation. Developing computational models that can integrate these patterns to predict and interpret  the 

regulatory system remains challenging. Here, we present GenoME, a Mixture of Experts (MoE) -based 

generative model that uses DNA sequence and cell -type -specific ATAC -seq signals to predi ct a unified 

genomic profile encompassing epigenomics, transcriptomics, and chromatin architecture at base -pair to 

kilo base resolutions. GenoME  enables  multiscale predictions for held -out genomic regions and, critically, 

generalizes to predict the full regulatory landscape of unseen  or individualized  cell types from a single ATAC -

seq input.  We equip GenoME with an  in silico  perturbation framework that accurately forecasts the multimodal 

consequences of genetic perturbations and identifies functional enhance r-promoter  connections, outperforming 

specialized models like Activity -by -Contact.  These  predictions can  also  be used to decipher the transcription 

factor grammar of cell -type -specific enhancers. GenoME thus provides a versatile, all -in -one platform for 

generative modeling, cross -cell -type generalization, and causal mechanistic investigation of the multiscale 

regu latory genome. 

# Introduction 

The eukaryotic genome is regulated by a dynamic, interconnected system operating across multiple scales 1–5.

The  cis -regulatory elements, marked by specific chromatin states and transcription factor occupancy, interact 

within the three -dimensional nuclear space to control precise spatiotemporal gene expression patterns 6. While 

large -scale consortia like ENCODE 7 and Roadmap Epigenomic 8 have generated vast multimodal datasets —

including  gene expression , histone modifications, and chromosome conformation —a fundamental challenge 

persists: integrating these disparate data types into a unified, predictive, and generalizable model of genomic 

regulation. Such a unified model, if realized, is expected to provi de important insight into the regulatory 

relation among the different regulatory mechanisms and thus provide a deep understanding of the determination 

of the cellular states and their response to stimuli. 

Significant strides have been made in generative genomic modeling. Pioneering models such as Enformer 9,

Borzoi 10  and AlphaGenome 11  demonstrated that deep learning architectures trained on DNA sequence alone 

can predict a variety of cell -type -specific chromatin 12 –15  and expression profiles 16 –20 , effectively learning a 

generalizable regulatory code from sequence context. However, by relying solely on sequence, these models are 

inherently constrained to predicting average profiles across the cell types in their training data; they cannot be 

dynami cally conditioned on a specific cellular context provided by a user, limiting their utility for personalized 

prediction or for studying cell types absent from the training distribution. A separate class of models 21 –31 ,

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

including Enformer -celltyp ing 24 , EPCOT 23,30 , GET 25 , and  C.Origami 26 , addressed  this task  by incorporating 

cell -type -defining signals —such as (sc)ATAC -seq , DNase -seq  or ChIP -seq  profiles —as direct model inputs 

alongside DNA sequence. While this strategy enables cell -type -specific prediction, these models are often 

specialized for a single output modality (e.g., gene expression for GET,  and  chromatin contacts for C .Origami) 

and may  suffer from  pattern  los s for samples  drastically  differ from the training  cells . Concurrently, large 

language models (LLMs) adapted for genomics 32 , such as Evo 33  and Nucleotide Transformer 34 , have shown 

remarkable promise in learning biological semantics from tokenized DNA sequences across scales. Yet, as 

purely sequence -based models, they share the limitation of being unable to ingest epigenetic context to 

condition their outputs on a specif ic cell state, separating their powerful pattern recognition from the 

mechanistic, context -aware simulation of the regulatory genome 35 .

Here, we introduce GenoME , a generative model designed to overcome these limitations through a novel 

Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture 36 . GenoME integrates a 1 -Mb DNA sequence with a corresponding cell -

type -specific ATAC -seq  or DNase -seq  signal to generate a unified, multiscale profile encompassing 

epigenomics, transcriptomics, and 3D conformation at their native resolutions. Compared to previous 

approaches,  the MoE framework allows the model to learn specialized, reusable "expert" functions for different 

regulatory concepts, facilitating robust generalization to new cellular contexts unseen during training.  The  built -

in  in silico  perturbat ion framework  also  allows causal interrogation of regulatory functions by manipulating the 

input chromatin accessibility profile  or DNA sequence . By unifying prediction, generalization, and perturbation 

within a single model, GenoME  thus  provides a versatile platform for exploring the causal logic of the 

multiscale regulatory genome, with  potential  applications in functional and personalized  genetics .

# Results 

GenoME Enables High -Fidelity, Cell -Type -Specific Multimodal Characterization 

GenoME is a Mixture of Experts (MoE )-based generative model designed for the cross -cell -type, multiscale 

prediction and perturbation of genomic profiles. For a given 1 -Mb locus, the model integrates the underlying 

DNA sequence with a cell -type -specific ATAC -seq profile to generate a unifie d set of multimodal predictions. 

The  tasks  considered here  include gene expression (total RNA -seq), transcription factor binding (TF ChIP -seq), 

a suite of histone modifications (Histone ChIP -seq), and 3D chromatin conformation (Hi -C contact maps), each 

at  its native resolution ( Fig. 1a ). 

As an example, we assessed the model's ability to recapitulate experimental profiles in a held -out genomic 

region from human heart ventricle ( Fig. 1b -c). Predictions closely matched experimental targets across all 

modalities, capturing fine -scale features such as sharp RNA -seq peaks at 1 -bp resolution and complex histone 

modification patterns at 128 -bp resolution ( Fig. 1c ). The model also successfully predicted higher -order 

chromatin architecture, generating Hi -C maps that reproduced characteristic domain s tructures and specific 

looping interactions  (Fig. 1d ). 

Quantitative  benchmarking confirmed the high fidelity of these predictions. GenoME  achieved correlations 

with experimental data that were comparable to or surpassed those of baseline models. For example, in selected 

chromosomes from an adult liver donor, GenoME’s predicted H3K27ac and RNA‑seq signals showed stronger 

alignment with exper imental targets than did predictions from AlphaGenome ( Fig. 1e -g).  Note that 

AlphaGenome, a sequence‑based model, is inherently constrained to generating average profiles for each tissue 

or cell type present in its training data. When predicting Hi‑C maps  on a held‑out chromosome at 4‑kb 

resolution, GenoME yielded superior distance‑stratified and insulation correlations relative to specialized 

models including Orca and C.Origami ( Fig. 1h -i). HiCGen exhibited an advantage in predicting long‑range 

contacts (>0.7 Mb), likely because it incorporates genomic context beyond the 1‑Mb input window. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary  Figs. 2 -7 present a more comprehensive benchmarking analysis, encompassing genome‑wide 

correlation assessments across multiple modalities, quantitative evaluations across diverse chromosomes and 

cell types, and comparisons with recent models. In these analyses, Gen oME -basic  (the basic version  of 

GenoME ) consistently matched or exceeded the performance of established models for nearly all profiled 

genomic features —particularly features directly tied to gene regulation, such as H3K27ac and chrom atin 

contact maps —underscoring its integrated design for capturing regulatory grammar. 

GenoME  Generalizes to Unseen Cellular Contexts and Captures Inter -Individual 

Variation 

Whereas foundational sequence‑based models such as AlphaGenome learn to predict a single, averaged 

regulatory profile per tissue type from DNA sequence alone, GenoME is explicitly designed to condition its 

predictions on a provided, donor‑specific epigenet ic state. This capability is demonstrated through predictions 

of RNA‑seq profiles for individual donors in tissues such as liver and psoas muscle ( Fig. 2a -b). Compared with 

the average signals predicted by AlphaGenome for each tissue type, our model effect ively tailors its predictions 

to the donor‑specific ATAC‑seq input (Supplementary Figs.  2-3). 

Analysis of the learned representations reveals the basis for this generalization ability. UMAP visualizations of 

both global and local (e.g., centered on the MYH13 locus, as in  Fig. 2b ) cell embeddings show that GenoME 

organizes cellular states in a biologically meaningful latent space, where clustering is driven  primarily by tissue 

of origin ( Fig. 2c -d). The context‑dependent variation in local embeddings and the clear separation of certain 

donors from the same tissue type (e.g., liver and psoas muscle) i n Fig. 2d  indicate that the model captures 

subtle, region‑specific differences in cellular state, thereby enhancing its adaptability to novel inputs.  Fig. 2e 

presents heatmaps of the mean gating weights for the contact‑map MoE layer across training and unseen cell 

types. Although certain experts are reused across cell types, both their activation levels and the combination of 

engaged experts are dynamically mo dulated by cellular context. Importantly, the gating network generalizes to 

unseen contexts: for ex ample, the unseen pancreas sample (F, 61) exhibits an expert usage pattern highly 

similar to that of the training pancreas sample (F, 59). HCT116 shows an expert usage profile broadly 

comparable to that of colon mucosa (a training tissue) but with differen t weight distributions. This structured 

reuse, rather than random assignment, explains why HCT116 can partially overlap with other cell types in the 

UMAP while still maintaining a distinct regulatory grammar. 

This generalization capability was then rigorously quantified. For de novo prediction of RNA‑seq and ChIP‑seq 

profiles in unseen liver and esophagus samples, GenoME‑basic outperformed recent cell‑type‑specific models, 

namely  Enformer -Celltyping 24  and EPCOT2 30  (Fig. 2f -g). More strikingly, when predicting the 3D 

conformation of the completely unseen HCT116 cell line, GenoME surpassed models specifically designed for 

Hi‑C prediction —including C.Origami and HiCGen —achieving superior distance‑stratified and insulation 

correl ations ( Fig. 2h -i). 

Th e robust cross -cell -type performance stems from GenoME's integrated MoE architecture, which allows 

knowledge sharing across modalities and cellular contexts through specialized expert layers.  While decoder 

MoE gating network capture  cell -type identit ies,  SwinT MoE experts specialize in genomic -region -level 

regulatory contexts  (Supplementary Fig.  9).  Consequently, the model can construct a coherent, multimodal 

regulatory state for a novel cell type using only its ATAC -seq profile as a guide. Together, these results 

establish GenoME as a powerful tool for inferring regulatory landscapes from a single ep igenetic input, even 

for cellular contexts absent from the training data. 

GenoME Enables  in silico  Perturbation for Mechanistic Investigation 

Beyond static prediction, a paramount utility of a generative model is its capacity to serve as an  in silico 

experimental system for probing causal regulatory relationships. We first validated this framework against 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

experimental data from genetically engineered HCT116 cell lines featuring auxin -induced degradation of key 

regulatory proteins: CDK7, POLR2A, CTCF, and RAD21. For the HBG2 locus, GenoME accurately predicted 

the consequent changes in both RNA -seq and CTCF C hIP -seq signals ( Fig. 3a -b). Critically, it generalized to 

the unseen perturbation of CDK7 degradation, successfully predicting the resultant transcriptional upregulation. 

Furthermore, the model's predicted Hi -C maps for each perturbation recapitulated spe cific structural alterations 

observed experimentally, including the severe disruption of topological boundaries following depletion of 

CTCF or RAD21 ( Fig. 3c ) —an outcome poorly characterized by non -MoE models (Supplementary Fig.4). 

To systematically characterize the regulatory impact of local chromatin accessibility, we performed  in silico 

silencing of 1‑kb  active  ATAC‑seq peaks across 40,000 randomly selected regions in wild‑type and genetically 

perturbed HCT116 cells (Methods). Averaging the resulting differential predictions revealed distinct 

perturbation profiles. H3K4me1 modifications exhibited a slightly broad er spread in SUPT16H‑depleted cells 

(Fig. 3d ), suggesting that altered nucleosome p ositioning reduces the precision of this activating mark. In 

contrast, H3K27me3 displayed a striking long‑range effect, with differential signals propagating over hundreds 

of kilobases and accurately capturing Polycomb‑mediated spreading ( Fig. 3e ). This repressive spread was 

further enhanced in cells lacking CTCF . In  fact , CTCF actively opens chromatin and erases the H3K27me3 

mark at its binding sites 37 . With the loss of  CTCF, H3K27me3 can spread into the formerly insulated region, 

leading to a clear and widespread increase in the repressive mark 38 . By contrast, depletion of RAD21 produced 

no pronounced effect, in line with cohesin’s indirect role in H3K27me3 regulation via loop extrusion. 

Experimental ChIP‑seq data from regions overlapping the silenced ATAC‑seq peaks validated these 

predictions: in  ΔCTCF cells, H3K27me3 indeed invaded previously insulated regions, closely matching the 

average differential curve predicted by GenoME ( Fig. 3e ); likewise, H3K4me1 showed a broader perturbation 

spread in SUPT16H‑depleted cells compared to other knockdowns  (Fig. 3d ), confirming the model’s 

perturbation framework. 

Finally, we demonstrate the utility of this framework for functional annotation.  Building upon the 

computational  perturbations of selected  enhancers act as context -specific silencers or activators, their functional 

roles can be directly validated through high -throughput screening  experiments  such as CRISP Ra and 

CRISPRi 39 –41 . For instance,  in silico  mutagenesis (ISM ; see Methods ) of two putative enhancers for the MYC 

gene, nominated by the Activity -by -Contact 41  (ABC) model, respectively yielded specific positive or negative 

differential RNA -seq signals ( Fig. 3f -g), which  are consistent with the re spective  changes in effective gene 

expression (i.e. 0.236 and  -0.362) determined in CRISPRi experiment. Collectively, GenoME establishes a 

powerful platform not only for forecasting experimental outcomes but also for large -scale, causal exploration of 

regulatory l ogic. 

GenoME Identifies Functional Enhancer -Promoter Connections 

A central challenge in genomics is the functional annotation of non -coding sequences and the accurate linkage 

of distal cis -regulatory elements (CREs) to their target genes. To quantify the predicted regulatory influence of 

a candidate enhancer, we derived  a novel "Gr adient -ABC" score that multiplies the model's integrated gradient 

by its predicted ABC score utilizing cell -type -specific ATAC -seq , predicted H3K27ac signal and Hi -C contact 

map (Methods). 

Benchmarked against high -throughput CRIS PRi -FlowFISH data in HCT116 cells —which provides a rigorous 

ground truth of 173 enhancer -promoter (E -P) pairs (38 validated positives) —the combinative score derived 

from the integrated gr adient contribution, ATAC -seq inputs, the predicted H3K27ac and contact maps (i.e. 

Gr ad-ABC score) achieved superior precision -recall performance compared to the established  ABC  score,  in

silico  mutagenesis (ISM)  and  DeepLIFT 42  score ( Fig. 4a ). This advantage was robust, as confirmed by 

bootstrap analysis of the area under the precision -recall curve (auPRC) ( Fig. 4b ), and generalized effectively to 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the unseen K562 cell line ( Supplementary  Fig.5), demonstrating the transferability of the learned regulatory 

principles. 

To illustrate the quantitative predictive power of the model, we conducted a focused  in silico  perturbation 

analysis on regulators of the FAM3C gene in HCT116 ( Fig. 4c -d). GenoME was used to predict the fractional 

change in FAM3C expression upon  ISM  of each candidate enhancer within a 512 kb window. The direction 

and magnitude of these  ISM  showed a  clear  positive correlation (Pearson  r = 0.53) with the changes measured 

in the actuals CRISPRi -FlowFISH experiments ( Fig. 4d ). This concordance confirms that Gen oME  can not 

only classify functional connections but also quantitatively estimate the magnitude and direction (enhancing or 

silencing) of a regulatory element's effect. 

GenoME  Deciphers Cell -Type -Specific Transcription Factor Codes 

The ability to infer the transcription factor (TF) code governing enhancer activity is a crucial step toward 

mechanistic understanding  of  transcriptional  regulation . In  Fig. 5a  we applied GenoME to dissect the 

regulatory landscape of the HBG2 locus, where inte grated gradient scores pinpointed distal enhancers active in 

HCT116 and its  engineered  variants ( HCT116 ∆MED14  and  HCT116 ∆CTCF ). 

In silico  mutagenesis (ISM) of one active enhancer (chr11:5,280,666 –5,281,166), performed with GenoME 

trained on HCT116 (GenoME -HCT116), generated nucleotide -resolution attribution maps ( Fig. 5b ). This 

analysis revealed specific, high -importance sequences matching binding motifs for known regulators, including 

FOS::JUN and EGR1. We reinforced this interpretation by overlaying ChIP -seq data: motif positions for FOSL 

and EGR1 coincided with ChIP -se q peaks of AP -1 family members (FOSL, JUND, SP1) and EGR1, 

respectively . In contrast, CTCFL and REST showed neither clear motif patterns nor strong ChIP -seq signals. 

These independent data confirm that GenoME correctly identifies activating motifs whose importance scales 

with expression output .

We further examined motif effects across HCT116 variants. As shown in  Fig. 5c , CTCFL exerted a stronger 

repressive effect on predicted gene expression in HCT116 and  HCT116 ∆MED14  than in  HCT116 ∆CTCF . Notably, 

substantially stronger CTCF ChIP ‑seq signals were also observed in HCT116 and  HCT116 ∆MED14 , indicating a 

context‑dependent interplay between CTCFL‑mediated repression and CTCF occupancy.  Similar correlations 

between motif enrichment and TF  peaks  were obtained  for  additional loci  (Supplementary Fig. 1 1). 

# Discussion 

A model that can accurately simulate the multiscale, cell -type -specific genome from first principles would 

dramatically accelerate our ability to interpret non -coding genetic variation, predict the consequences of 

genomic perturbations, clarify the relatio n between different epigenetic marks, and decode the logic of cellular 

identity.  Here we present GenoME, a multimodal generative model that successfully unifies the prediction of 

genomic features from DNA sequence and chromatin accessibility acros s scales  and cell types. By leveraging a 

Mixture of Experts architecture, GenoME moves beyond single -task or single -cell -type models to offer a 

versatile, all -in -one platform for genomic analysis.  The MoE  architecture learns reusable regulatory "building 

blocks" rather than strictly disjoint cell -type representations. The encoder (SwinT) MoE layers specialize in 

genomic -region -level contexts (e.g., forest/prairie compartments 43 ), while the decoder MoE layers exhibit cell -

type -specific routing patterns.  Our results demonstrate its capabilities i n multisc ale and multi -modal 

characterization  and  cross -cell -type generalization. 

While integration is a strength, we note that adding output modalities does not uniformly improve performance 

across all tasks. For instance, incorporating a splice junction prediction head slightly reduced accuracy for other 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

tracks (Supplementary Fig. 7). This observation aligns with ablation studies in other generative models, such as 

AlphaGenome, where adding certain task heads had negligible effects on unrelated outputs. This phenomenon 

likely reflects the inherent tension  between shared and task -specific representations within a unified model. 

Adding a complex prediction target, such as splice junctions, may introduce a supervisory signal whose optimal 

feature space partially conflicts with or dilutes features critical for  other tasks. 

Beyond static prediction, GenoME serves as a versatile  in silico  experimental platform and  provides a direct 

path from functional prediction to mechanistic insight. The integrated gradient scores derived from the model 

outperformed the established ABC model in classifying functional enhancer -gene pairs from CRISPRi screens. 

When combined with  in silico  mutagenesis, this approach successfully identifies transcription factor motifs 

driving activity at predicted enhancers, connecting sequence syntax to regulat ory function in a cell -type -

specific manner. 

Despite its strengths, GenoME  has limitations that point toward future development. Its current context window 

of 1 Mb, while sufficient for many locus -specific investigations, prevents analysis of long -range interactions or 

whole -chromosome organization. Furthermore, the model curren tly treats chromatin accessibility as a static, 

condition -defining input. Future iterations could incorporate time -series or stimulus -responsive data to model 

dynamic regulatory processes. Int egrating genetic variation as an explicit input would allow dire ct prediction of 

the multiscale functional consequences of SNPs and other variants, bridging closer to personalized genomics. 

Finally, to improve efficiency and accuracy with even longer sequence lengths, more sophisticated architectural 

designs —such as hy brid models incorporating  Mamba  44  or Hyena  45,46 —are promising directions. 

In conclusion, GenoME represents a unified,  cell -type -specific  model of the multiscale regulatory genome. Its 

ability to generalize across contexts and simulate perturbations bridges the gap between correlative observation 

and causal understanding. We envision it becoming a platform for interpreting non -coding genomes ,

prioritizing functional elements , and  ultimately enhancing our ability to decipher the complex regulatory code 

of life 47 .

# Materials and Methods 

Data preprocessing 

Reference Genome : the genomic sequences  for training the model  were derived from human GRCh38/hg38 

reference genome. Gene and transcript annotations used for evaluations were based on  the GTF V4 7

annotations  derived from  the  GENCODE  data portal  (https://www.gencodegenes.org/).  We performed five -

channel one -hot encoding of the genomic bases ‘ACGT’ and the unknown base ‘N’.  For sequence  intervals that 

extended beyond chromosomal boundaries, we  used  'N' characters for padding to maintain the consistency of 

input length. 

ATAC -seq Data : the sequencing data for  ATAC -seq  experiments  were obtained from the ENCODE data 

portal  (https://www.encodeproject.org/ ). For  quality control of the ATAC -seq data as model input, we 

stringently selected tracks that met the following conditions: 

1. The data contained  neither ‘ERROR’ level  ENCODE  audits , nor  ‘NOT_COMPLIANT’  level audits  related 

to  insufficient read depth, insufficient number of reproducible peaks,  or  severe  bottlenecking ;

2.  The experiments were performed either on  Illumina NovaSeq 6000  or  Illumina HiSeq 4000  platform; 

3.  The tracks had a l ibrary fragment size  of  200 -7000  nt and a read length of 100 nt. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For each ATAC -seq experiment,  we  first downloaded  the raw alignment (BAM) files for individual replicates. 

The  BAM files were  merged and subsampled down to 50M reads (samples with reads less than 50M were 

removed). Next, the down -sampled  BAM files  were converted into  bigWig files  following the procedure of 

ChromBPNet 48 . The final outputs shall  preserve the base -resolution nature of the data and facilitate  decoupling 

enzyme cut bias  (by  Tn5 ) from true signal by applying appropriate read shifts.  By taking the above quality 

check, we finally  obtained  63 groups of ATAC -seq tracks in tissues, 9 groups in primary cells and 17 groups in 

cell lines.  Details  of all  accession number are listed in Supplementary Table  1-3. To improve numerical 

stability,  we transformed each ATAC -seq track signal as follows: 

Signal trans  = ln (Signal  + 1).

The global chromatin accessibility corresponds to the chromatin accessibility for 3  kb  around the transcriptional 

start  site of 1216 marker genes  nominated by  PangloaDB 49  was also labeled as cell -type features feed to the 

Mixture of Experts (MoE)  layer for better gating during training. These global signals were  averaged at 250 -bp 

resolution  and then compressed into  an input in length of  14,592 , provid ing  a cell -type -defining context vector .

See  Supplementary Table  4 for the full list of these marker genes .

RNA -seq Data : the sequencing data for total RNA -seq  experiments  were  also  obtained from ENCODE . The 

selected tracks met the following conditions: 

1. the data contained  neither ‘ERROR’ level  ENCODE  audits , nor  ‘NOT_COMPLIANT’  level audits  related to 

insufficient read  length; 

2. the bio -sample summary and term of the track corresponded to one of the selected ATAC -seq tracks; 

3. the tracks had a minimum l ibrary fragment size  of  200  nt and a minimum read length of 100 nt. 

4.  the data were released not earlier than 2019 .

We selected the stared  bigWig  files with name  ‘minus strand signal of unique reads’  and  ‘plus strand signal of 

unique reads’.  If multiple  bigWig file s per experiment and output type  correspond to a single ATAC -seq track ,

the one with less  severe audit flags  and latest  processing date  was chosen . Details  of all  accession number are 

listed in Supplementary Table  1-3. Each individual  RNA -seq  signal track was normalized to represent a total of 

100 million reads  and then  divided by the mean of their non -zero  values.  To  dampen  extremely high signals , we 

further applied scaling and clipping transformation to each  trac k as follows: 

Signal trans  = {

Signal 3/4, 𝑓𝑜𝑟  Signal  > 10 ,

√40  × Signal 3/4 − 10 , 𝑓𝑜𝑟  Signal  ≤ 10 .

ChIP -seq Data : for TF ChIP -seq (CTCF), Histone ChIP -seq and Mint -ChIP -seq signals (H3K27ac, 

H3K27me3, H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K9me3, H3K36me3), we selected  fold change over control bigwig  files 

from ENCODE . through the ChIP -Route. The selected tracks met the following conditions: 

1. the data contained  neither ‘ERROR’ level  ENCODE  audits , nor  ‘NOT_COMPLIANT’  level audits  related to 

severe bottlenecking ;

2. the bio -sample summary and term of the track corresponded to one of the selected ATAC -seq tracks; 

3. the tracks had a minimum mapped read length of 50 nt. 

4.  the data were release not before than 2019 .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Similarly, If multiple  bigWig file s per experiment  type correspond to a single ATAC -seq track , the one with 

less  severe audit flags  and latest  processing date  was chosen . Details  of all  accessing numbers are listed in 

Supplementary Table  1-3. The tracks were also respectively  divided by the mean of their non -zero  values  and 

clipped at 10, similarly to  the handling  for RNA -seq signals (but without the 3/4 scaling) .

Hi -C Data : The  intact  Hi -C data were derived from the call sets from the ENCODE portal with identifiers 

listed in  Supplementary Table  1-3. All data were mapped to hg38 in cool format  50 . Raichu  normalization 51  with 

default parameters were performed to the unbalanced data to remove biases. B ins with fewer than 10 nonzero 

counts were removed from the balanced matrix.  Adaptive coarse graining procedures  52  were applied to the 

contact matrices to smooth the low -coverage areas at 1 -kb -resolution.  The average contact frequency as a 

function of genomic distance (i.e.  genomic -distance -based background ) was determined by cooltools 53 . Each 

Hi -C data was then normalized as the  log -fold contact map over  the  background  as follows: 

Signal 𝑖 ,𝑗  

> 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠

= ln  (Signal i,j + 10 −7

εd + 10 −7 ),

with  εd representing the averaged background at genomic distance  d=abs(i -j). 

Splice Junction s:  The  splice junctions  were derived from th e BAM files of the corresponding total RNA -seq 

datasets. By  referring  to  GTF V4 7 annotations  derived from  the  GENCODE, each BAM file was processed by 

samtools  and  then realigned  with STAR 54  (Splice -aware Transcriptome Aligner)  to  discover  splice junction s. 

The  alignment  was performed with a  minimum splice junction overhang of 8 base pairs, allowing a maximum 

of 20 alignments for multi -mapping reads . The minimum and maximum allowed intron length were set to 20 

and  10 6, respectively. 

The output  junction s were  only  retained if its  strand information is specific and its  read count is greater than 3. 

The retained junction counts for each sample were normalized to 1 million  total filtered junction reads  for each 

sample . For  numerical stability,  the  retained junction counts were first clipped at  1000 and then  divided by their 

mean values  for each sample .

The splice sites were derived from the AlphaGenome 11  output head of the  splice site classification . For any 

giving input genome interval, the splice sites (i.e. doners and  acceptor s) were determined respectively as t he  top 

512 sites  of  highest probability from the  output of the  splice site classification  for each strand.  The  splice 

junction s were then  represented as a  512 ×512  matrix corresponding to  the  donor -acceptor  pairs  for each strand .

Each element of the matrix  was filled by  the  corresponding experimental  counts for  each  donor -acceptor  pair 

(padded with 0 otherwise) .

Model architecture 

GenoME  takes 1 -Mb  sequence and genomic  feature s (ATAC -seq  or DNase -seq) as inputs, and  down -samples 

the  represented  length from single nucleotides down to  128 bp  for  each bin by  deploy ing seven  blocks of 1D 

convolutional neural network ( 1D -CNN). The  1D -CNN module  is  implemented  mainly for reducing the spatial 

dimension and  adding  channels of each token. 

The  embeddings of t he sequence and genomic  feature s at 128 bp  are  processed based on the  Swin -

transformer 55,56  (Swin T) and  Mamba  44  architecture.  The transformer tower  consists of five  consecutive Swin T

blocks with a window size  𝑠 𝑤𝑖𝑛 =256 . The token length is halved after each Swin T block, and the channel 

dimension is doubled after the third Swin T block  (Supplementary Fig. 1) . The transformer tower  outputs 

embeddings  at  128 , 2 56 , 512 , 1024 and  2048 -bp  resolutions,  processed with 4, 2, 2, 2, and 2 Swin -attention 

layers, respectively. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For the initial two Swin -attention layers, we have a m ixture of  experts (MoE) layer integrated within each 

Transformer block's feedforward network  (Supplementary Fig. 1) . The MoE layer consists of  one shared 

expert  and  five  specialist  experts. Each expert is implemented as a two -layer neural network with GELU 

activations and dropout. The  gating network  determines expert selection by processing both local sequence 

embeddings and a global cell -type context vector. This global context vec tor, linearly projecte d to 128 

dimensions, enables the model to condition expert selection on specific cellular states. For each input token, the 

gating network computes logits for the eight cell -type experts, applies  SoftMax  with temperature  τ annealing 

from 0.8 to 0.5 with decay rate 0.95 , and selects the top -2 experts. Two auxiliary losses ensure balanced expert 

utilization: (1) a  z-loss  (coefficient 0.0001  with decay rate 0.95 ) penalizing large logit magnitudes for numerical 

stability, and (2) a  load -balancing loss  (coeffici ent 0.001  with decay rate 0.95 ) encouraging equitable expert 

usage by penalizing high variance in gating weights. This design enables specialized expert functions to 

develop for different regulatory patterns while maintaining the flexibility to recombine them for novel cellular 

context s using only the ATAC -seq -derived context vector. 

The decoder  for contact map is of  a 2D  convolutional neural network ( 2D -CNN).  The  module takes 

embeddings at 2048 -bp  resolution  generated by SwinT as input, generating contact map  with a window size of 

512 ×512  matrix.  2D -CNN  starts with a MoE  gating network  with  one shared and  eight  specialist  experts ,

followed by  five dilated residual blocks . The final predictions of the contact map are generated by a head block 

with  a GELU activation and  linear transformation .

The decoder for 1 -D signals  employs up -sampling and  a U -Net -style skip connections  to  the  encoder  at 1024, 

512, 256, 128, 64, 32, 16, 8, 4, and 2 -bp resolutions (Supplementary Fig. 1) . The output heads for ChIP -seq and 

RNA -seq tracks respectively takes the 128 -bp and 1 -bp embeddings (after U -Net up -sampling) as inputs. Each 

output head contains a MoE  gating network  with  one shared  and eight  specialist  experts , a convolutional layer, 

a linear transformatio n and  Softplus  activation. 

The output  head  for splice junctions  predicts counts for potential junctions betwe en donor  and acceptor sites ,

taking  the 1 -bp resolution embeddings  as inputs . First, a linear layer projects the embeddings to an intermediate 

dimension  of 512 channels . The positions for 512  donor  and acceptor  sites  (for each strand)  of  highest 

probability from  AlphaGenome ’s prediction are embedded through the  RoPE formulation . Finally,  the 

predicted count s for each junction  are obtained  via an inner product between the  processed donor and acceptor 

embeddings, followed by a Softplus activation .

Training 

The model was trained on  a GPU cluster with  8 NVIDIA Tesla A100 80GB GPUs. The data -loader generates 

training data, including sequence , ATAC -seq and total RNA -seq signals at 1 -bp resolution , ChIP -seq signals at 

128 -bp resolution  and Hi -C maps  at  2-kb  resolution . DNA sequence and ATAC -seq signals in length of 1 Mb 

were implemented as model inputs. The data were obtained by uniformly sampling the  annotated gene regions 

from training chromosomes.  Chromosomes were split into training, validation and test set ba sed on the 

Chromosome ID.  The  entire chr10  and  chr15 w ere respectively  assigned to the validation  and  test set , while the 

rest were  assigned  to the training set . To enhance prediction accuracy, non -readable regions  (including 

telomere s or centromere s)  were masked.  To reduce overfitting  during training,  each sampled interval was 

shifted by a  randomly sampled  distance from  -8192  to + 8192  bp.  We also  replaced about half of the forward -

sequences with their reverse -complement counterparts during the training  process. Gaussian noise with zero 

mean and 0.1 standard deviation was added to input signals. 

For comparison, we trained three models, i.e. GenoME -basic, GenoME -finetuned (GenoME -ft) and GenoME -

HCT116, each with specific training cell types and targets . GenoME -basic was trained on 8 selected tissues 

(Supplementary Table  5) for 100 epochs (without early -stopping). The training data from the selected tissue 

donors contained full targets (i.e. 2 RNA -seq tracks, 7 ChIP -seq tracks and 1 Hi -C map for each sample). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

GenoME -ft was first pretrained on 64 groups of ATAC -seq tracks in tissues and 9 groups in primary cells for 

100 epochs (without early -stopping), and then finetuned with 8 selected tissues same to GenoME -basic for 

another 100 epochs. GenoME -HCT116 was train ed on 15 groups of  original  and genetically perturbed HCT116 

samples ( Supplemen tary Table  5) for 100 epochs (without early -stopping). The  batch size  was set to  B=16 for 

pretraining, and B=8 for GenoME -basic, GenoME -HCT116 and  finetuning  GenoME -ft . The  pret raining was 

performed  on 8 A100 GPUs (2 batches per GPU).  The other tasks  used 4 GPUs, requiring approximately  80 

hours  each.  Unless otherwise specified, the predictions and  metrics  in the main text  were  generated by the 

GenoME -basic  model. 

The training loss  for ChIP -seq and RNA -seq tracks is  calculated as a weighted sum of Poisson and  Multinomial 

negative log -likelihoods , which can be written as: 

𝐿 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘  = 𝐿 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘  

> 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛

+ 5𝐿 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘 

> 𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑎𝑙

=∑[∑ pred  − ∑ targets  ∗ ln (∑ pred )] + 5 ∑[( − ∑ targets  ∗ ln (pred / ∑ pred )].

For  numerical stability , the relevant sequence axis is divided into 8 equal segments  before loss calculation for 

each track . Moreover, coverage at h ighly expressed exons may be several orders of magnitude higher than 

those of background  for RNA -seq tracks . Therefore, at positions where the RNA -seq signal exceeds ten times 

the average, we double the weight in the loss calculation.  To  promotes tissue -specific  expression patterns 57 , we 

also add an  auxiliary gene -level loss contributes to the model’s total training loss with an overall  weight of 0.1 

for RNA -seq targets, which is calculated as the  Poisson  negative log -likelihoods  of the total counts for each 

gene. 

For predicting splice junctions, t he  loss is a weighted combination of the cross -entropy and Poisson 

components , which reads as: 

𝐿 𝑆𝐽  = 𝐿 𝑆𝐽  

> 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛

+ 1

40 𝐿 𝑆𝐽 

> 𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 −𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑦

= − ∑ [targets  ∗ ln  ( pred 𝑆𝐽   

> ∑pred 512
> 𝑖 𝑆𝐽

)] + 1 

> 40

∑[(∑ pred 512   

> 𝑖 𝑆𝐽

− ∑ targets 512   

> 𝑖 𝑆𝐽

𝑙𝑛  (∑ pred 512  

> 𝑖 𝑆𝐽

)].

Th e loss  is performed independently for positive and negative strand predictions using their respective  splice 

sites. 

Contact matrices at lower resolutions  were obtained  by average pooling the original Hi -C data. Contact 

matrices were down -sampled to meet the prediction windows at  2-kb  resolution.  The model was trained to 

predict the  log -fold contact maps over genomic -distance -based background . T he output matrices w ere 

compared with the experimental Hi -C map via a mean squared error (MSE) loss. 

We trained the model with Adam optimizer, with a  maximum  learning rate of 2 ×10 -4 and a weight decay of  10 -

> 4

. The learning rate followed a schedule with a linear warmup from 0 to 2 ×10 -4 over the first  20  epochs ,

followed by a  Cosine annealing to 0 over the remaining  80  epochs .

Evaluation 

For cell -type -specific  prediction s, t he model was provided with two inputs: (1) the 1 -Mb reference DNA 

sequence from the target locus, and (2) the ATAC -seq profile from a cell type  within or  completely absent from 

the training data. No further fine -tuning on the target cell type was performed. The model's predictions across 

all modalities were then compared to the experimental data from the  specific  cell type. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The performance of GenoME and comparator models was assessed using standard correlation metrics. For 

genomic tracks (RNA -seq, TF, and histone ChIP -seq), we comput ed the  track -averaged and bin -wise  Pearson 

correlation coefficient between the predicted and experimental signal at the native resolution of each track  for 

the held -out  test set (chr15) . For unseen cell -types, we also computed whole -genome benchmarking for other 

chromosomes. For RNA -seq prediction, we also measured gene -level  correlation s by averag ing counts within 

specific exon regions.  For Hi -C contact maps, we calculated distance -stratified correlation by computing the 

correlation coefficient separately for pairs of genomic bins within  1 Mb intervals. We also evaluated insulation 

score correlation and observed -over -expected (O/E) correlation for the contact maps as described previously 27 .

To evaluate predictive fidelity, we benchmarked GenoME against state -of -the -art models: 

AlphaGenome . AlphaGenome is a  unified sequence -based model offering multimodal predictions of gene 

expression, splicing patterns, chromatin features, and contact maps. As a purely sequence -based model, 

AlphaGenome outputs a single, tissue -averaged prediction per track and cannot be co nditioned on a donor -

specific epigenetic state.  Prediction results for the identical 1 -Mb DNA sequences from our test set were 

obtained via the official AlphaGenome API  (https://www.alphagenomedocs.com/api). For benchmarking ChIP -

seq and RNA -seq tracks in  the right lobe of liver, we used the model output corresponding to the standard 

tissue identifier UBERON:  0001114. For benchmarking ChIP -seq and RNA -seq tracks in  pancreas , we used the 

model output corresponding to the standard tissue identifier UBERON:  0001264.  For benchmarking  Contact 

map  in  HCT116 , we used the model output corresponding to the EFO  ID:  0002824. 

Enformer -Celltyping.  The ATAC -seq and six histone ChIP -seq experiments, along with their corresponding 

control BAM files, were downloaded from ENCODE and converted to the hg19 reference genome using 

liftOver to ensure compatibility with Enformer -Celltyping. The converted BAM  files were then processed 

through the ENCODE standard ATAC -seq or ChIP -seq pipelines, with the number of fragments capped at 50 

M to generate the p -value signal tracks. Using the resulting ATAC -seq signal track, we applied the model 

wei ghts provided in Enformer -Celltyping to generate genome -wide predicted histone -mark profiles. We 

compiled the union of genomic intervals used during Enformer -Celltyping training across all cell types. Within 

each interval, we partitioned the sequence into  128 -bp bins and computed the correlation coefficient between 

predicted and observed signal values. The results were compared against imputed EpiMap signal tracks for 

these samples. For the training -set evaluation, we selected two representative groups of s amples (i.e. 

ENCSR654UYP and ENCSR308HPZ). To evaluate the performance of Enformer -Celltyping on data not 

included in the training set, we selected one ENCODE sample (ENCSR516CPW) as an independent test case. 

EPCOT(v2).  The ChIP -seq data were preprocessed based on the EPCOT2 protocol. The ChIP -seq signals were 

downloaded from ENCODE in signal p -value format, followed by z -score normalization and trimming to the 

range ( −2, 36), consistent with the EPCOT2 protocol. RNA -seq data were obtained from ENCODE with 

strand -specific separation. The ATAC -seq tracks were generated from BAM files and converted to RPGC 

format using bamCoverage. The default pretrained weights provided b y EPCOT2 were used in benchmarking. 

Signal s were predicted within a 500 kb window at the default 1 kb resolution. We took the exp(x)  − 1

transformation for the RNA -seq tracks. For Hi -C data, we evaluated the O/E correlation with SCALE -

normalization of the contact maps. Next, the target and predicted matrices were aggregated to 2 -kb resolution. 

Based on the data preprocessing pipeline of  EPCOT2, a Gaussian filter with a width of 2 was applied to smooth 

the experimental contact matrices. Subsequently, the experimental Hi -C data were trimmed to the ra nge of  −2

to 10, consistent with the preprocessing procedure of EPCOT2. 

GET . Since GenoME metrics gene -level expression on  held -out test  chromosome, w e derived  leave -one 

chromosome -out benchmark ing results of the  general expression transformer  (GET) from their paper 25 . As 

reported,  an average Pearson correlation of 0.78 (minimum: 0.73, maximum:  0.84)  was obtained  on fetal 

astrocytes. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Hi -C predictors . We presented comparison with previously released Hi -C predictors  AlphaGenome 11 , Orca 14 ,

C.O rigami 26  and  HiCGen 27 . Since  AlphaGenome  was  trained to predict a 1 -Mb window of contacts, we 

restricted regions for comparison to 1 -Mb blocks.  If possible, w e selected 1 -Mb held -out genomic regions from 

cell types present in their respective training data  or completely unseen cell types . For  AlphaGenome , we chose 

chr15  predicted  by  the  distilled  model  (which inevitably introduced data within training set)  ; for Orca,  we 

selected  chr10  predicted  by  the model trained  on  HFF; for C.Origami,  we used  chr15  predicted  by  with the 

model trained  on  IMR90; for  HiCGen, chr15  predicted  by  the model trained  on  GM12878  was used . We 

performed additional genomic -distance -based normalizations to the predicted results  (and also the target maps) 

of C.Origami , which was already preprocessed  to  the training  targets  of  AlphaGenome , Orca and HiCGen. To 

align with the 8 -kb resolution of the prediction of C.Origami, we  selected the 2 -Mb window in Orca and 

HiCGen and cropped out the centering 1 -Mb window for  comparison.  Since both  AlphaGenome  and Orca do 

not allow  unseen  cell -type predictions, benchmarking performance  on  de novo  prediction of unseen cell types 

was compared only  with  HiCGen and C.Origami. 

In silico  perturbation framework 

A core capability of GenoME is its use as a predictive,  in silico  experimental system. The framework allows 

causal interrogation of regulatory logic by manipulating model inputs and observing the consequent multimodal 

predictions. Perturbations are applied to the inputs of a trained model, and the forward pass is recompu ted to 

generate a new set of multiscale profiles. The differential between the perturbed and reference  predictions 

quantifies the estimated effect.  Three primary perturbation modes are implemented: 

Epigenetic signal activation/silencing.  The cell -type -defining ATAC -seq input profile is directly modified. 

This simulates experimental interventions that alter chromatin accessibility, such as CRISPR -mediated 

enhancer activation/silencing or the effects of protein degradation on chromatin stat e.  Signal  silencing  is 

implemented by s etting ATAC -seq  signal values larger than ln(2)  within a defined genomic window to  ln(2) .

Signal  activation  is implemented by r eplacing signals with a boosted or exogenous profil e (e.g., from another 

cell type). 

DNA sequence perturbation ( In silico  mutagenesis, ISM).  The one -hot encoded DNA sequence input is 

altered. This simulates the impact of genetic variants or targeted edits. For a given genomic window, every 

possible single -nucleotide substitution (A, C, G, T) is applied at each position sequentially. The change  in a 

specific model output (e.g ., gene expression log -counts) relative to the wild -type sequence is calculated as the 

attribution score for that position and nucleotide. 

DeepLIFT/SHAP.  We utilized via Captum 58  for calculating nucleotide -specific DeepLIFT/SHAP scores. 

DeepLIFT contributions were averaged over 50 dinucleotide ‑shuffled baselines with ATAC signal set to its 

mean value. This process entailed generating 50 dinucleotide ‑shuffled variants of each sequence to serve as 

reference points. Subsequently, the importance scores obtained from DeepLIFT/SHAP 42  for each sequence 

were combined with their respective one -hot -encoded matrices, yielding the final nucleotide contribution 

scores. 

Integrated gradient attribution.  To score the importance of specific input features (sequence or chromatin 

accessibility) for a given prediction, integrated gradients are computed. This provides a continuous attribution 

map across the input window, highlighting bases or accessible regions  most critical for the model's output.  To 

simulate a continuous transition between cellu lar states, the ATAC -seq profile is morphed from a source state 

(e.g., HCT116 wild -type) to a target state (e.g., HCT116 ΔCTCF ) via line ar interpolation across N=50 steps. For 

each intermediate step  i, the input signal is computed as: 

Signal i = (1  - αi) ∗ Signal source  + αi ∗ Signal target ,

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

where α i = i / (N -1). The model's outputs (e.g., gene expression, H3K27me3, contact maps) are computed at 

each step, generating a trajectory of predicted consequences. 

Perturbation analysis 

The general framework described above was applied to conduct specific causal analyses: 

Simulation of genetic perturbations . The effects of protein degron experiments (e.g., auxin -induced 

degradation of CTCF, RAD21, CDK7, POLR2A) were modeled by providing GenoME with the ATAC -seq 

profile from the corresponding genetically modified cell line (HCT116 ΔCTCF , etc.) as input, while keeping the 

reference DNA sequence unchanged. 

Regional epigenetic silencing/activation . We first  categorized 1 -kb genomic fragments  with at least 1 bp 

ATAC -seq  signal values larger than ln(2)  to  active  regions. Their ATAC -seq  peaks  were silenced or replaced 

with signals from an active state (e.g., a cancer enhancer profile applied to a normal tissue background). The 

mean absolute difference across all predicted mod alities before and after perturbation defined an impact score. 

For instance, by  silencing perturbations across 40,000  active  regions, the av erage differential curve for histone 

marks (e.g., H3K27me3, H3K4me1) was calculated to quantify the genomic range and magnitude of epigenetic 

change.  The  differential curve  was compared to the average ChIP -seq signals at overlapped regions with 

ATAC -seq peaks, which was calculated as the genome -average ChIP -seq signals with 30 -kb window size 

centered at the same peak positions derived from ENCODE. 

Gradual epigenetic transition . The cell -type modulation was used to trace the non -linear progression of 

outputs like H3K27me3 spreading or contact domain dissolution as the chromatin accessibility landscape was 

progressively transformed from a wild -type to a CTCF -depleted state. 

Enhancer -promoter pair prediction 

We obtained enhancer –promoter (E -P) pairs from CRISPR -interference followed by FlowFISH 40,41,59 

(CRISPRi -FlowFISH), which perturbs enhancers and measures gene expression changes in HCT116 and K562 

cells. For HCT116 experiment, we selected E -P pairs within 512 kb of the transcription start site (TSS), 

identifying 173 enhancer -promoter pairs with 38 a ctive ones (Supplementary Table 6). The active enhancers 

significantly reduced gene expression (adjusted p -value < 0.05) with more than 80% power to detect a 25% 

effect size after perturbation. E -P pairs for K562 were derived from the CRISPRi dataset 54 .

We introduced different scores to prioritize E -P pairs. Candidate e nhancers  were derived from ENCODE 

annotations, which  were defined by the  activity -by -contact  (ABC) method 41 . The ABC score for each E -P pair 

was calculated as the product of ATAC, H3K27ac signal and Hi -C contacts, while the predicted ABC score was 

calculated as the product of ATAC, predicted H3K27ac signal and Hi -C co ntacts. The  in silico  saturation 

mutagenesis (ISM) score was determined by setting each base pair in the enhancer region to the unknown 

nucleotide N in the vocabulary set and comparing against the wild -type magnitude of the corresponding gene 

expression. The  DeepLIFT score was determined based on th e 10 -fold baseline with dinucleotide ‑shuffled 

sequences and ATAC signal setting to the mean value.The gradient scores were calculated as the integrated 

gradient (IG) from two types of baseline inputs within the selected enhancer regio: 1) uniform distribution of 

encoding DNA (i.e. 0.25 for ea ch nucleotide) with true ATAC -seq  signals , Grad seq , and 2) ATAC -seq signals 

setting to its mean value with true genomic sequence, Grad atac . The integral step was set to 50. A min -max 

normalization was next applied to bo th Grad seq  and Grad atac .The Gr ad-ABC score was calculated as the product 

of the model's IG and the predicted ABC score. Note that the IG score we compute is highly targeted: for each 

enhancer --gene pair, the predicted RNA ‑seq track is reduced to a single scalar --the mean predicted RNA level 

over the selected gene interval (on specific strand). IG is then calculated with respect to this scalar and 

measured only within the enhancer coordinates of interest. Consequently, the g radient score reflects how 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

changes in the sequence of enhancer and local chromatin features affect that specific gene expression. We also 

introduced other assays to score E -P pairs, including Hi -C contacts, H3K27ac signal, and the negative distance 

between TSS and enhancer. The thre e attention -based scores were evaluated alongside the ABC score and other 

assays in classifying E -P pairs with significant expression changes, measured using the area under the 

precision -recall curve (auPRC). To remove gene -related bias, we normalized the  scores for all promoter -

enhancer pairs, ensuring their sum equals one for eac h selected gene. These normalized scores were used as the 

attention scores to assess all enhancer -promoter pairs. 

Motif discovery 

We utilized TF -MoDISco 60  to identify motifs in nucleotide contribution scores across enhancer sequences from 

the testing set based on the previously determined DeepLIFT contribution scores. We implemented default 

settings to find seqlet patterns which were then compared against t he JASPAR database using Tomtom 61 .To 

identify motifs of high importance scores, we perform  in silico  saturation mutagenesis (ISM) on the model 

given a DNA sequence of interest. ISM functions by sequentially substituting each character in a sequence with 

every other possible character , followed by  assess ment of  the change in the predictive output before and after 

each substitution. This observed difference is interpreted as a measure of importance or attribution, where a 

higher magnitude value indicates that the character change has a signi ficant impact on the prediction, thereby 

suggesting its high importance. Therefore, ISM can be used to uncover block of nucleotides corresponding to 

TF motifs on the putative enhancer sequence. T he corresponding sequence was scanned against the  hg38 

reference genome, using 2,179 TF motif position weight matrices  previously compiled  in a global reference 

map 62 . The cumulative motif weight of the selected motif is calculated by summing the ISM scores of each 

nucleotide in the fragment.  The predicted ISM scores were compared with the corresponding TF ChIP -seq 

signals derived from ENCODE (Supplementary Table). 

# References 

1. Lieberman -Aiden, E.  et al.  Comprehensive mapping of long -range interactions reveals folding principles 

of the human genome.  Science  326 , 289 –293 (2009). 

2.  Rao, S. S. P.  et al.  A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin 

looping.  Cell  159 , 1665 –1680 (2014). 

3.  Parmar, J. J., Woringer, M. & Zimmer, C. How the genome folds: the biophysics of four -dimensional 

chromatin organization.  Annu Rev Biophys  (2019). 

4.  Rowley, M. J. & Corces, V. G. Organizational principles of 3D genome architecture.  Nat Rev Genet  19 ,

789 –800 (2018). 

5.  Huang, K.  et al.  Physical and data structure of 3D genome.  Science Ad vance  6, eaay4055 (2020). 

6.  Tiwari, S., Karbalayghareh, A. & Leslie, C. S. Predicting the regulatory genome.  Nature Reviews 

Genetics  26 , 659 –660 (2025). 

7.  Dunham, I.  et al.  An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome.  Nature  489 , 57 –

74 (2012). 

8.  Satterlee, J. S.  et al.  The NIH Common Fund/Roadmap Epigenomics Program: Successes of a 

Comprehensive Consortium.  http://advances.sciencemag.org/  (2019). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9.  Avsec, Ž.  et al.  Effective gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long -range 

interactions.  Nat Methods  18 , 1196 –1203 (2021). 

10.  Linder, J., Srivastava, D., Yuan, H., Agarwal, V. & Kelley, D. R. Predicting RNA -seq coverage from 

DNA sequence as a unifying model of gene regulation.  Nat Genet  57 , 949 –961 (2025). 

11.  Avsec, Ž.  et al.  AlphaGenome : Advancing regulatory variant effect prediction with 

AlphaGenome.  Nature  649, 1206 -1218  (202 6).

12.  Fudenberg, G., Kelley, D. R. & Pollard, K. S. Predicting 3D genome folding from DNA sequence with 

Akita.  Nat Methods  17 , 1111 –1117 (2020). 

13.  Schwessinger, R.  et al.  DeepC: predicting 3D genome folding using megabase -scale transfer learning. 

Nat Methods  17 , 1118 –1124 (2020). 

14.  Zhou, J. Sequence -based modeling of three -dimensional genome architecture from kilobase to 

chromosome scale.  Nat Genet  54 , 725 –734 (2022). 

15.  Chen, K. M., Wong, A. K., Troyanskaya, O. G. & Zhou, J. A sequence -based global map of regulatory 

activity for deciphering human genetics.  Nat Genet  54 , 940 –949 (2022). 

16.  Barbadilla -Martí nez, L., Klaassen, N., van Steensel, B. & de Ridder, J. Predicting gene expression from 

DNA sequence using deep learning models.  Nat Rev Genet  26 , 666 –680 (2025). 

17.  Rafi, A. M.  et al.  A community effort to optimize sequence -based deep learning models of gene 

regulation.  Nat Biotechnol  43 , 1373 –1383 (2025). 

18.  Wang, Y., Liang, N. & Gao, G. Quantifying the regulatory potential of genetic variants via a hybrid 

sequence -oriented model with SVEN.  Nat Commun  15 , (2024). 

19.  Murphy, A. E., Askarova, A., Lenhard, B., Skene, N. G. & Marzi, S. J. Predicting gene expression from 

histone marks using chromatin deep learning models depends on histone mark function, regulatory 

distance and cellular states.  Nucleic Acids Res  53 , (2025). 

20.  Dudnyk, K., Cai, D., Shi, C., Xu, J. & Zhou, J. Sequence basis of transcription initiation in the human 

genome.  Science  384 , (2024). 

21.  Yang, R.  et al.  Epiphany: predicting Hi -C contact maps from 1D epigenomic signals.  Genome Biol  24 ,

(2023). 

22.  Lin, J., Luo, R. & Pinello, L. EPInformer: A Scalable Deep Learning Framework for Gene Expression 

Prediction by Integrating Promoter -enhancer Sequences with Multimodal Epigenomic Data.  bioRxiv 

(2024). 

23.  Zhang, Z., Feng, F., Qiu, Y. & Liu, J. A generalizable framework to comprehensively predict 

epigenome, chromatin organization, and transcriptome.  Nucleic Acids Res  51 , 5931 –5947 (2023). 

24.  Murphy, A. E., Beardall, W., Rei, M., Phuycharoen , M. & Skene, N. G. Predicting cell type -specific 

epigenomic profiles accounting for distal genetic effects.  Nat Commun  15 , (2024). 

25.  Fu, X.  et al.  A foundation model of transcription across human cell types.  Nature  637 , 965 –973 (2025). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26.  Tan, J.  et al.  Cell -type -specific prediction of 3D chromatin organization enables high -throughput in 

silico genetic screening.  Nat Biotechnol  41 , 1140 –1150 (2023). 

27.  Wei, J., Xue, Y. & Gao, Y. Q. Hierarchical Prediction and Perturbation of Chromatin Organization 

Reveal How Loop Domains Mediate Higher -Order Architectures.  Adv Sci  12 , (2025). 

28.  Schuette, G., Lao, Z. & Zhang, B.  ChromoGen: Diffusion Model Predicts Single -Cell Chromatin 

Conformations . Sci. Adv  11,  (2025). 

29.  Lin, M. Y., Lo, Y. C. & Hung, J. H. Unveiling chromatin dynamics with virtual epigenome.  Nat 

Commun  16 , (2025). 

30.  Zhang, Z.  et al.  Developing a general AI model for integrating diverse genomic modalities and 

comprehensive genomic knowledge.  Nucleic Acids Res.  53, (2025). 

31.  Grover, A.  et al.  UniversalEPI: robust prediction of cell type -specific and differential chromatin 

interactions from DNA sequence and chromatin accessibility.  Nucleic Acids Res.  54, (2026). 

32. Consens, M. E.  et al.  To Transformers and Beyond: Large Language Models for the Genome. 

http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07621  (2023). 

33. Nguyen, E . et al.  Sequence modeling and design from molecular to genome scale with Evo.  Science  386 ,

eado9336 (2024). 

34. Dalla -Torre, H.  et al.  Nucleotide Transformer: building and evaluating robust foundation models for 

human genomics.  Nat Methods  22 , 287 –297 (2025). 

35. Tang, Z. & Koo, P. K. Evaluating the representational power of pre -trained DNA language models for 

regulatory genomics.  Genom. Biol.  26, (2025) .

36. Mu, S. & Lin, S. A Comprehensive Survey of Mixture -of -Experts: Algorithms, Theory, and 

Applications.  arXiv:2503.07137  (2025). 

37. Weth, O.  et al.  CTCF induces histone variant incorporation, erases the H3K27me3 histone mark and 

opens chromatin.  Nucleic Acids Res  42 , 11941 –11951 (2014). 

38. Fang, H.  et al.  CTCF -mediated insulation and chromatin environment modulate Car5b escape from X 

inactivation.  BMC Biol  23 , (2025). 

39. Kampmann, M. CRISPRi and CRISPRa Screens in Mammalian Cells for Precision Biology and 

Medicine.  ACS Chem Biol  13 , 406 –416 (2018). 

40.  Nasser, J.  et al.  Genome -wide enhancer maps link risk variants to disease genes.  Nature  593, 238 –243 

(2021). 

41.  Fulco, C. P.  et al.  Activity -by -contact model of enhancer –promoter regulation from thousands of 

CRISPR perturbations.  Nat. Genet.  51, 1664 –1669 (2019). 

42.  Lundberg, S. M., Allen, P. G. & Lee, S. -I.  A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions .

https://github.com/slundberg/shap. 

43.  Liu, S.  et al.  From 1d sequence to 3d chromatin dynamics and cellular functions: A phase separation 

perspective.  Nucleic Acids Res  46, 9367 –9383 (2018). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44.  Gu, A. & Dao, T.  Mamba: Linear -Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces. 

arXiv:2312.00752 . (2023). 

45.  Nguyen, E.  et al.  HyenaDNA: Long -Range Genomic Sequence Modeling at Single Nucleotide 

Resolution.  Advances in neural information processing systems  36 , 43177 -43201  (2023). 

46.  Poli, M.  et al.  Hyena Hierarchy: Towards Larger Convolutional Language Models.  PMLR  28043 -28078 

(2023). 

47. Bunne, C . et al.  How to build the virtual cell with artificial intelligence: Priorities and 

opportunities.  Cell  187 , 7045 -7063 (2024). 

48. Pampari, A.  et al.  ChromBPNet : bias factorized, base -resolution deep learning models of chromatin 

accessibility reveal cis -regulatory sequence syntax, transcription factor footprints and regulatory 

variants.  bioRxiv  (2025). 

49.  Franzé n, O., Gan, L. M. & Bjö rkeg ren, J. L. M. PanglaoDB: A web server for exploration of mouse and 

human single -cell RNA sequencing data.  Database , (2019). 

50.  Abdennur, N. & Mirny, L. A. Cooler: Scalable storage for Hi -C data and other genomically labeled 

arrays.  Bioinformatics  36, 311 –316 (2020). 

51.  Wang, X.  et al.  Boosting the detection of enhancer -promoter loops via novel normalization methods for 

chromatin interaction data.  Nat. Commun.  (202 6). 

52.  Chen, K. M., Cofer, E. M., Zhou, J. & Troyanskaya, O. G. Selene: a PyTorch -based deep learning library 

for sequence data.  Nat. Methods  16, 315 –318 (2019). 

53.  Abdennur, N.  et al.  Cooltools: Enabling high -resolution Hi -C analysis in Python.  PLoS Comput. Biol. 

20, (2024). 

54.  Dobin, A.  et al.  STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA -seq aligner.  Bioinformatics  29, 15 –21 (2013). 

55. Liu, Z.  et al.  Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer Using Shifted Windows.  Proc 

IEEE/CVF Intern Confer Computer Vision , IEEE, Montreal, QC (20 21 ). 

56. Liu, Z.  et al.  Swin Transformer V2: Scaling Up Capacity and Resolution.  Proc IEEE/CVF Intern Confer 

Computer Vision , IEEE, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA  (20 22 ). 

57.  Lal, A.  et al.  Decoding sequence determinants of gene expression in diverse cellular and disease states. 

bioRxiv  (2024). 

58.  Kokhlikyan, N.  et al.  Captum: A Unified and Generic Model Interpretability Library for 

PyTorch.  arXiv  (2020). 

59.  Gschwind, A. R.  et al.  An encyclopedia of enhancer -gene regulatory interactions in the human genome. 

bioRxiv  (2023) .

60.  Jacob Schreiber. https://github.com/jmschrei/tfmodisco -lite/.  TF -Modisco  (2023). 

61.  Bloom M,  et al . ETV6 Represses TNF during Stress Hematopoiesis and Regulates HSC Self Renewal. 

Blood  140,  2849 –2850 (2022). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

62.  Vierstra, J.  et al.  Global reference mapping of human transcription factor footprints.  Nature  583 , 729 –

736 (2020). 

# Data availability 

All primary experimental datasets used in this study were obtained from publicly accessible sources. The 

specific repositories and individual accession numbers of these data sources are provided in the Supplementary 

tables. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by National Science and Technology Major Project (No. 2022ZD0115001), National 

Natural Science Foundation of China (92353304, T2495221) and New Cornerstone Science Foundation 

(NCI202305).  Computations were carried out at Changping Laboratory Supercomputing Center. 

# Competing interest statement 

The authors have no conflicts to disclose. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig.1 GenoME enables cell -type specific multi -modal characterization of the genome. 

a. With 1 -Mb DNA sequence as well as cell -type specific ATAC -seq signals as inputs, GenoME enables 

predictions of epigenomics, gene expression, activities of cis -regulatory elements, TF bindings, and contact 

maps. 

b-d. exemplified 1 -Mb (b) ATAC -seq inputs (blue), (c) the corresponding predictions (red) and targets (gray) of 

total RNA -seq at 1bp resolution, ChIP -seq (including CTCF TF -ChIP seq, H3K27ac, H3K27me3, and 

H3K36me3 Histone ChIP -seq) at 128bp resolution an d (d) Hi -C maps at 2048bp resolution, for a selected 

region for heart right ventricle (male, 69 years). 

e-g. 2D comparisons of GenoME ( blue ) and AlphaGenome ( green ) model predictions with experimental targets 

for  track -average  (e)  total RNA -seq signals at 1 bp  and  (f)  H3K27ac Histone ChIP -seq at 128 bp for right lobe 

of liver , female , 47 years.  (g) Comparisons of corresponding bin -wise  correlations  of model predictions  with 

measurements .

h,i.  Comparisons of (h) s tratified distance correlations  and (i) insulation correlations of  predicted Hi -C matrices 

determined by  GenoME, Orca, AlphaGenome, C .Origami and HiCGen with experimental  targets . All predicted 

and experimental maps were reshaped and/or truncated to a 1 -Mb window at 4 -kb resolution. Correlations were 

measured at test sets of the training cell type for each model (HCT116 for AlphaGenome and GenoME, HFF 

for Orca, IMR90 for C .Origami, and GM12878 for HiCGen). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a

DNA Sequence 

GenoME 

Contact map Expression 

> A
> TT
> CC
> G

b

d

c

e f

h

g

Cell -type -specific 

accessibility 

TF binding Epigenomics 

> ATAC

Latent representation (global) 

Encoder Decoder U-Net 

SwinT with MoE  

> RNA
> H3K27ac
> RNA H3K27ac

i.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig.2 GenoME captures personalized genomic features via de novo cross -celltype predictions. 

a,b . Comparisons of selected genome regions with distinct expression profiles between different individuals for 

(a) right lobe liver and (b) psoas muscle tissue. The predicted RNA -seq profiles (blue) show good consistency 

with experimental results ( red ), while the tissue -average profile is predicted by AlphaGenome (green). 

c,d . UMAP projection of the (c) global embeddings of representative chromatin accessibility and (d) local 

embeddings of 1 -Mb ATAC -seq signals centered around MYH13.  Input ATAC -seq profiles  are colored by 

their broad tissue type. Both global and local cell type embedding shows co -localization of similar cell types, 

but local UMAPs obtained from different input genome regions may vary greatly. 

e. Heat maps of mean gating weights respectively for conact map MoE layers across the test set chromosomes, 

for training (upper panel) as well as unseen (lower panel) cell types. Red box indicates the selected experts with 

largest output weights. 

f,g.  Comparisons of  bin -wise  correlations of  total RNA -seq and H3K27ac  ChIP -seq tracks of  de novo 

predictions of unseen  samples,  (f)  right lobe liver female 41 -ys  and (g) esophagus squamous epithelium  female 

53 -ys , for GenoME, Enformer -Celltyping and EPCOT 2.

h,i.  metrics of de novo predictions of an unseen cell line, HCT116, in terms of ( h) distance stratified 

correlations  and  (i) insulation correlations of Hi -C maps. All predictions were measured by GenoME -basic .

Predictions of Hi -C maps were compared with C.Origami trained on IMR90 , HiCGen trained on GM12878, 

and HiCGen -MoE trained on GM12878,  IMR90, sigmoid colon,  PANC -1 and prostate gland. With the help of 

MoE layers and multi -modal predicting heads, GenoME achieves the best performance on these tasks. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a b

dc

f

h

g

right_lobe_liver psoas_muscle      

> average by AlphaGenome
> female, 16 -ys by GenoME
> female, 47 -ys by GenoME female, 16 -ys by GenoME
> average by AlphaGenome
> female, 41 -ys by GenoME

e

i  

> RNA H3K27ac
> RNA H3K27ac

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig.3 GenoME allows  in silico  perturbations through silencing/activating selected genome regions. 

a-c. Exemplified comparisons of (a) RNA -seq, (b) CTCF ChIP -seq and (c) contact maps predicted by GenoME -

HCT116  with experimental signals of HBG2 region of HCT116 and its genetically modified counterparts 

HCT116 ∆CDK7 , HCT116 ∆POLR2A , HCT116 ∆CTCF  and HCT116 ∆RAD21  (which corresponding to Auxin -induced 

degradation of CDK7, POLR2A, CTCF and RAD21, respectively). HCT116 ∆CDK7  was unseen during training. 

d,e. The average differential curves of (d) H3K4me1 and (e) H3K27me3 predicted by GenoME -HCT116  for 

40,000 randomly selected genomic regions of HCT116 and its genetically modified counterparts, by silencing 

of 1 -kb ATAC -seq  peaks . Also presented are the average (d) H3K4me1 and (e) H3K27me3 ChIP -seq signals at 

overlapped regions with ATAC -seq peaks derived from ENCODE (lower panels).  Wider impact range was 

observed for HCT116 ∆SUPT16H  in H3K4me1 and HCT116 ∆CTCF  in H3K27me3. 

f,g. The differential curves of total RNA -seq of HCT116 predicted by GenoME -HCT116  by  in silico 

mutagenesis (ISM) of active cis -regulatory element of MYC nominated by Activity -by -Contact (ABC) and 

validated by CRISPRi -FlowFISH. Positive (f) and negative (g) changes at TSS and gene bodies indicate the 

silencer or enhancer role of the remote element r espectively, both of which are consistent with effective 

changes in gene expression (lower right of each panel) determined by CRISPRi -FlowFISH. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a

c

e

f

b

d

g 

> CRISPRi: 0.236
> CRISPRi: -0.362

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig.4 GenoME identifies activities of cis -regulatory elements. 

a. Precision -recall plot for classifiers of enhancer -promoter  (E -P) pairs. Positive E -P pairs are those for which 

perturbation of the can didate enhancer significantly changes expression of the gene. The  precision -recall curves 

represent the performance of the integrated gradient score of GenoME,  in  silico  mutagenesis (ISM) , DeepLIFT 

contributing score,  predicted ABC score, and other assays on classifying 173 E -P pairs (with 38 positive ones) 

screened by CRISPRi -FlowFISH of HCT116. Predictions were  measured  by  GenoME -HCT116 .

b. 1000 bootstap means of area under the precision -recall curve (auPRC) represent the performance of the E -P

classifiers shown in (a) on classifying E -P pairs within 512 -kb  distance to the TSS .

c. From top to bottom: the total RNA -seq, gene annotations, ATAC -seq, Hi -C contact, H3K27ac ChIP -seq, 

nominated enhancers for FAM3C tested and validated by CRISPRi -FlowFISH , and enhancers for FAM3C 

validated by Grad -ABC score, for 1 -Mb locus centered at the TSS of FAM3C. The black dotted line marks the 

TSS of FAM3C . 

d. Bar plot illustrating the fractional change in gene expression resulting from (a )HCT116 CRISPRi -FlowFISH 

experiments and (b)  ISM  of each candidate regulator of FAM3C using GenoME within 200 -kb distance to the 

TSS (black box shown in (c)). The sign of the scores indicate whether  ISM  the candidate enhancers within the 

bin would up -regulate (+) or down -regulate expression of the gene. A Pe arson correlation coefficient of 0.53 

was obtained from the scores of experimental and computational perturbations. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a

c

b

d.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig.5 GenoME  predicts transcription factor motifs at cell -type -specific enhancers. 

a. From top to bottom: the total RNA -seq, gene annotations, H3K27ac ChIP -seq, nominated enhancers for 

HBG2 tested and validated by Grad -ABC score, for 1 -Mb locus centered at the HBG2 TSS of HCT116, 

HCT116 ∆MED14  and HCT116 ∆CTCF . The black dotted line marks the TSS of HBG2. 

b,c.  The  in  silico  mutagenesis (ISM) attribution score at  (b)  chr11:5,280,666 -5,281,166  and (c) 

chr11: 5,684 ,524 -5,685 ,004  with top predicted enhancer activity (indicated by  blue  arrow s shown in a) ，

overlayed by the corresponding TF ChIP -seq data derived from ENCODE . All ISM inferences were measured 

by GenoME -HCT116.  Sequences with high scores are highlighted in the boxes, with labels and arrows 

indicating the ID and names of the resembling known TF motifs in  the JASPAR database. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a

b

c.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 23, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.28.696482 doi: bioRxiv preprint